absolute poverty • The minimal requirements necessary to sustain a healthy existence.
activity theory • A functionalist theory of aging, which holds that busy, engaged people are more likely to lead fulfilling and productive lives.
age-grades • The system found in small traditional cultures by which people belonging to a similar age group are categorized together and hold similar rights and obligations.
ageism • Discrimination or prejudice against a person on the grounds of age.
agency • The ability to think, act, and make choices independently.
agents of socialization • Groups or social contexts within which processes of socialization take place.
aging • The combination of biological, psychological, and social processes that affect people as they grow older.
agrarian societies • Societies whose means of subsistence are based on agricultural production (crop growing).
alienation • The sense that our own abilities as human beings are taken over by other entities. The term was originally used by Karl Marx to refer to the projection of human powers onto gods. Subsequently he used the term to refer to the loss of workers’ control over the nature and products of their labor.
anomie • A concept first brought into wide usage in sociology by Durkheim, referring to a situation in which social norms lose their hold over individual behavior.
assimilation • The acceptance of a minority group by a majority population, in which the new group takes on the values and norms of the dominant culture.
authority • A government’s legitimate use of power.
automation • Production processes monitored and controlled by machines with only minimal supervision from people.
 
biological determinism • The belief that differences we observe between groups of people, such as men and women, are explained wholly by biological causes.
biomedical model of health • The set of principles underpinning Western medical systems and practices. The biomedical model of health defines diseases objectively, in accordance with the presence of recognized symptoms, and holds that the healthy body can be restored through scientifically based medical treatment. The human body is likened to a machine that can be returned to working order with the proper repairs.
black feminism • A strand of feminist theory that highlights the multiple disadvantages of gender, class, and race that shape the experiences of nonwhite women. Black feminists reject the idea of a single, unified gender oppression that is experienced evenly by all women and argue that early feminist analysis reflected the specific concerns of white, middle-class women.
blue- and pink-collar jobs • Jobs that typically pay low wages and often involve manual or low-skill labor. Blue-collar jobs typically are held by men (e.g., factory worker), whereas pink-collar jobs are typically held by women (e.g., clerical assistant).
bourgeoisie • People who own companies, land, or stocks (shares) and use these to generate economic returns, according to Marx.
broken windows theory • A theory proposing that even small acts of crime, disorder, and vandalism can threaten a neighborhood and render it unsafe.
bureaucracy • A type of organization marked by a clear hierarchy of authority and the existence of written rules of procedure and staffed by full-time, salaried officials.
 
capitalism • An economic system based on the private ownership of wealth, which is invested and reinvested in order to produce profit.
caste society • A society in which different social levels are closed, so that all individuals must remain at the social level of their birth throughout life.
caste system • A social system in which one’s social status is determined at birth and set for life.
church • A large, established religious body, normally having a formal, bureaucratic structure and a hierarchy of religious officials. The term is also used to refer to the place in which religious ceremonies are carried out.
citizen • A member of a political community, having both rights and duties associated with that membership.
civil inattention • The process whereby individuals in the same physical setting demonstrate to each another that they are aware of the other’s presence.
civil rights • Legal rights held by all citizens in a given national community.
civil society • The realm of activity that lies between the state and the market, including the family, schools, community associations, and other noneconomic institutions. Civil society, or civic culture, is essential to vibrant democratic societies.
class • Although it is one of the most frequently used concepts in sociology, there is no clear agreement about how the term should be defined. Most sociologists use the term to refer to socioeconomic variations among groups of individuals that create variations in their material prosperity and power.
clock time • Time as measured by the clock, in terms of hours, minutes, and seconds. Before the invention of clocks, time reckoning was based on events in the natural world, such as the rising and setting of the sun.
cognition • Human thought processes involving perception, reasoning, and remembering.
cohabitation • Two people living together in a sexual relationship of some permanence without being married to each other.
collective bargaining • The rights of employees and workers to negotiate with their employers for basic rights and benefits.
colonialism • The process whereby Western nations established their rule in parts of the world away from their home territories.
communism • A set of political ideas associated with Marx, as developed particularly by Lenin and institutionalized in the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and some developing countries.
community policing • A renewed emphasis on crime prevention rather than law enforcement to reintegrate policing within the community.
comparable worth • Policies that attempt to remedy the gender pay gap by adjusting pay so that those in female-dominated jobs are not paid less for equivalent work.
comparative questions • Questions concerned with drawing comparisons among different human societies for the purposes of sociological theory or research.
comparative research • Research that compares one set of findings on one society with the same type of findings on other societies.
complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) • A diverse set of approaches and therapies for treating different illnesses and promoting well-being that generally falls outside of standard medical practices.
compulsion of proximity • People’s need to interact with others in their presence.
concrete operational stage • A stage of human cognitive development, as formulated by Jean Piaget, in which the child’s thinking is based primarily on physical perception of the world. In this phase, the child is not yet capable of dealing with abstract concepts or hypothetical situations.
conflict theory • Argument that deviance is deliberately chosen and often political in nature.
constitutional monarchs • Kings or queens who are largely figureheads. Real power rests in the hands of other political leaders.
continuity theory • Theoretical perspective on aging that specifies that older adults fare best when they participate in activities consistent with their personality, preferences, and activities earlier in life.
control theory • A theory that views crime as the outcome of an imbalance between impulses toward criminal activity and controls that deter it. Control theorists hold that criminals are rational beings who will act to maximize their own reward unless they are rendered unable to do so through either social or physical controls.
conurbation • An agglomeration of towns or cities into an unbroken urban environment.
conversation analysis • The empirical study of conversations, employing techniques drawn from ethnomethodology. Conversation analysis examines details of naturally occurring conversations to reveal the organizational principles of talk and its role in the production and reproduction of social order.
core countries • According to world-systems theory, the most advanced industrial countries, which take the lion’s share of profits in the world economic system.
corporate crime • Offenses committed by large corporations in society, including pollution, false advertising, and violations of health and safety regulations.
corporate culture • An organizational culture involving rituals, events, or traditions that are unique to a specific company.
corporations • Business firms or companies.
correlation coefficient • A measure of the degree of correlation between variables.
created environment • Constructions established by human beings to serve their needs, derived from the use of man-made technology—including, for example, roads, railways, factories, offices, private homes, and other buildings.
crime • Any action that contravenes the laws established by a political authority. Although we may think of criminals as a distinct subsection of the population, there are few people who have not broken the law in one way or another during their lives. While laws are formulated by state authorities, it is not unknown for those authorities to engage in criminal behavior in certain situations.
crude birthrate • A statistical measure representing the number of births within a given population per year, normally calculated as the number of births per 1,000 members. Although the crude birthrate is a useful index, it is only a general measure, because it does not specify numbers of births in relation to age distribution.
crude death rate • A statistical measure representing the number of deaths that occur annually in a given population per year, normally calculated as the number of deaths per 1,000 members. Crude death rates give a general indication of the mortality levels of a community or society, but are limited in their usefulness because they do not take into account the age distribution.
cult • A fragmentary religious grouping to which individuals are loosely affiliated but which lacks any permanent structure.
cultural capital • Noneconomic or cultural resources that parents pass down to their children, such as language or knowledge. These resources contribute to the process of social reproduction, according to Bourdieu.
cultural relativism • The practice of judging a society by its own standards.
cultural universals • Values or modes of behavior shared by all human cultures.
culture • The values, norms, and material goods characteristic of a given group. Like the concept of society, the notion of culture is widely used in sociology and the other social sciences (particularly anthropology). Culture is one of the most distinctive properties of human social association.
culture of poverty • The thesis, popularized by Oscar Lewis, that poverty is not a result of individual inadequacies but is instead the outcome of a larger social and cultural atmosphere into which successive generations of children are socialized. The culture of poverty refers to the values, beliefs, lifestyles, habits, and traditions that are common among people living under conditions of material deprivation.
 
data • Factual information used as a basis for reasoning, discussion, or calculation. Social science data often refer to individuals’ responses to survey questions.
debriefing • Following a research study, the investigator will inform study participants about the true purpose of the study, and will reveal any deception that happened during the study.
degree of dispersal • The range or distribution of a set of figures.
democracy • A political system that allows the citizens to participate in political decision making or to elect representatives to government bodies.
democratic elitism • A theory of the limits of democracy, which holds that in large-scale societies democratic participation is necessarily limited to the regular election of political leaders.
demographic transition • An interpretation of population change, which holds that a stable ratio of births to deaths is achieved once a certain level of economic prosperity has been reached. According to this notion, in preindustrial societies there is a rough balance between births and deaths, because population increase is kept in check by a lack of available food, by disease, or by war. In modern societies, by contrast, population equilibrium is achieved because families are moved by economic incentives to limit the number of children.
demography • The study of the size, distribution, and composition of populations.
denomination • A religious sect that has lost its revivalist dynamism and become an institutionalized body, commanding the adherence of significant numbers of people.
dependency culture • A term popularized by Charles Murray to describe individuals who rely on state welfare provision rather than entering the labor market. The dependency culture is seen as the outcome of the “paternalistic” welfare state that undermines individual ambition and people’s capacity for self-help.
dependency ratio • The ratio of people of dependent ages (children and the elderly) to people of economically active ages.
dependency theories • Marxist theories of economic development arguing that the poverty of low-income countries stems directly from their exploitation by wealthy countries and the multinational corporations that are based in wealthy countries.
developing world • The less-developed societies, in which industrial production is either virtually nonexistent or only developed to a limited degree. The majority of the world’s population live in less-developed countries.
developmental questions • Questions that sociologists pose when looking at the origins and path of development of social institutions from the past to the present.
deviance • Modes of action that do not conform to the norms or values held by most members of a group or society. What is regarded as deviant is as variable as the norms and values that distinguish different cultures and subcultures from one another. Forms of behavior that are highly esteemed by one group are regarded negatively by others.
deviant subculture • A subculture whose members hold values that differ substantially from those of the majority.
diaspora • The dispersal of an ethnic population from an original homeland into foreign areas, often in a forced manner or under traumatic circumstances.
differential association • An interpretation of the development of criminal behavior proposed by Edwin H. Sutherland, according to whom criminal behavior is learned through association with others who regularly engage in crime.
direct democracy • A form of participatory democracy that allows citizens to vote directly on laws and policies.
discrimination • Behavior that denies to the members of a particular group resources or rewards that can be obtained by others. Discrimination must be distinguished from prejudice: Individuals who are prejudiced against others may not engage in discriminatory practices against them; conversely, people may act in a discriminatory fashion toward a group even though they are not prejudiced against that group.
disengagement theory • A functionalist theory of aging that holds that it is functional for society to remove people from their traditional roles when they become elderly, thereby freeing up those roles for others.
displacement • The transferring of ideas or emotions from their true source to another object.
division of labor • The specialization of work tasks, by means of which different occupations are combined within a production system. All societies have at least some rudimentary form of division of labor, especially between the tasks allocated to men and those performed by women. With the development of industrialism, the division of labor became vastly more complex than in any prior type of production system. In the modern world, the division of labor is international in scope.
dominant group • The opposite of a minority group; the dominant group possesses more wealth, power, and prestige in a society.
doubling time • The time it takes for a particular level of population to double.
downward mobility • Social mobility in which individuals’ wealth, income, or status is lower than what they or their parents once had.
dyad • A group consisting of two persons.
 
ecological approach • A perspective on urban analysis emphasizing the “natural” distribution of city neighborhoods into areas having contrasting characteristics.
economic interdependence • The fact that in the division of labor, individuals depend on others to produce many or most of the goods they need to sustain their lives.
economy • The system of production and exchange that provides for the material needs of individuals living in a given society. Economic institutions are of key importance in all social orders. What goes on in the economy usually influences other areas in social life. Modern economies differ substantially from traditional ones, because the majority of the population is no longer engaged in agricultural production.
egocentric • According to Jean Piaget, the characteristic quality of a child during the early years of his or her life. Egocentric thinking involves understanding objects and events in the environment solely in terms of the child’s own position.
emerging economies • Developing countries that over the past two or three decades have begun to develop a strong industrial base, such as Singapore and Hong Kong.
emigration • The movement of people out of one country in order to settle in another.
empirical investigation • Factual inquiry carried out in any area of sociological study.
encounter • A meeting between two or more people in a situation of face-to-face interaction. Our daily lives can be seen as a series of different encounters strung out across the course of the day. In modern societies, many of these encounters are with strangers rather than people we know.
endogamy • The forbidding of marriage or sexual relations outside one’s social group.
entrepreneur • The owner or founder of a business firm.
environmental ecology • A concern with preserving the integrity of the physical environment in the face of the impact of modern industry and technology.
ethnicity • Cultural values and norms that distinguish the members of a given group from others. An ethnic group is one whose members share a distinct awareness of a common cultural identity, separating them from other groups. In virtually all societies, ethnic differences are associated with variations in power and material wealth. Where ethnic differences are also racial, such divisions are sometimes especially pronounced.
ethnocentrism • The tendency to look at other cultures through the eyes of one’s own culture, and thereby misrepresent them.
ethnography • The firsthand study of people using participant observation or interviewing.
ethnomethodology • The study of how people make sense of what others say and do in the course of day-to-day social interaction. Ethnomethodology is concerned with the “ethnomethods” by which people sustain meaningful exchanges with one another.
experiment • A research method in which variables can be analyzed in a controlled and systematic way, either in an artificial situation constructed by the researcher or in naturally occurring settings.
exponential growth • A geometric, rather than linear, rate of increase. Populations tend to grow exponentially.
extended family • A family group consisting of more than two generations of relatives.
external risk • Dangers that spring from the natural world and are unrelated to the actions of humans. Examples of external risk include droughts, earthquakes, famines, and storms.
exurban country • A county that lies within a large metropolitan area but has less than 25 percent of its population in an urbanized area. Tends to sit at periphery of metropolitan areas.
 
factual questions • Questions that raise issues concerning matters of fact (rather than theoretical or moral issues).
family • A group of individuals related to one another by blood ties, marriage, or adoption, who form an economic unit, the adult members of which are often responsible for the upbringing of children. All known societies involve some form of family system, although the nature of family relationships varies widely. While in modern societies the main family form is the nuclear family, extended family relationships are also found.
family capitalism • Capitalistic enterprise owned and administered by entrepreneurial families.
family of orientation • The family into which an individual is born or adopted.
family of procreation • The family an individual initiates through marriage or by having children.
fecundity • A measure of the number of children that it is biologically possible for a woman to produce.
feminism • Advocacy of the rights of women to be equal with men in all spheres of life. Feminism dates from the late eighteenth century in Europe, and feminist movements exist in most countries today.
feminist theory • A sociological perspective that emphasizes the centrality of gender in analyzing the social world and particularly the experiences of women. There are many strands of feminist theory, but they all share the intention to explain gender inequalities in society and to work to overcome them.
feminization of poverty • An increase in the proportion of the poor who are female.
fertility • The average number of live-born children produced by women of childbearing age in a particular society.
focused interaction • Interaction between individuals engaged in a common activity or in direct conversation with each another.
folkways • A subtype of norm; they guide our casual or everyday interactions. Violations are sanctioned subtly or not at all.
formal operational stage • According to Jean Piaget, a stage of human cognitive development at which the growing child becomes capable of handling abstract concepts and hypothetical situations.
formal organization • Means by which a group is rationally designed to achieve its objectives, often using explicit rules, regulations, and procedures.
formal relations • Relations that exist in groups and organizations, laid down by the norms, or rules, of the official system of authority.
franchise • The right to vote.
functional literacy • Having reading and writing skills that are beyond a basic level and are sufficient to manage one’s everyday activities and employment tasks.
functionalism • A theoretical perspective based on the notion that social events can best be explained in terms of the functions they perform—that is, the contributions they make to the continuity of a society.
 
gender • Social expectations about behavior regarded as appropriate for the members of each sex. Gender refers not to the physical attributes distinguishing men and women but to socially formed traits of masculinity and femininity. The study of gender relations has become one of the most important areas of sociology in recent years.
gender inequality • The inequality between men and women in terms of wealth, income, and status.
gender socialization • The learning of gender roles through social factors such as schooling, the media, and family.
gender typing • Designation of occupations as male or female, with “women’s” occupations, such as secretarial and retail positions, having lower status and pay, and “men’s” occupations, such as managerial and professional positions, having higher status and pay.
generalized other • A concept in the theory of George Herbert Mead, according to which the individual takes over the general values of a given group or society during the socialization process.
genocide • The systematic, planned destruction of a racial, political, or cultural group.
gentrification • A process of urban renewal in which older, deteriorated housing is refurbished by affluent people moving into the area.
glass ceiling • A promotion barrier that prevents a woman’s upward mobility within an organization.
global city • A city—such as London, New York, or Tokyo—that has become an organizing center of the new global economy.
global commodity chain • A worldwide network of labor and production processes yielding a finished product.
global inequality • The systematic differences in wealth and power among countries.
globalization • The economic, political, and social interconnectedness of individuals and nations throughout the world.
government • The enacting of policies and decisions on the part of officials within a political apparatus. While in the past virtually all governments were headed by monarchs or emperors, in most modern societies governments are run by officials who do not inherit their positions of power but are elected or appointed on the basis of qualifications.
groupthink • A process by which the members of a group ignore ways of thinking and plans of action that go against the group consensus.
 
hate crime • A criminal act by an offender who is motivated by some bias, such as racism, sexism, or homophobia.
heterosexuality • Sexual or romantic attraction to persons of the opposite sex.
hidden curriculum • Traits of behavior or attitudes that are learned at school but not included within the formal curriculum—for example, gender differences.
home schooling • A growing trend (but a longtime practice) of parents or guardians educating their children at home, for religious, philosophical, or safety reasons.
homosexuality • Sexual or romantic attraction of persons of one’s own sex.
housework • Unpaid work carried on in the home, usually by women; domestic chores such as cooking, cleaning, and shopping. Also called domestic labor.
human resource management • A style of management that regards a company’s workforce as vital to its economic competitiveness.
hypothesis • An idea or a guess about a given state of affairs, put forward as a basis for empirical testing.
 
ideal type • A “pure type,” constructed by emphasizing certain traits of a social item that do not necessarily exist in reality. An example is Max Weber’s ideal type of bureaucratic organization.
ideology • Shared ideas or beliefs that serve to justify the interests of dominant groups. Ideologies are found in all societies in which there are systematic and ingrained inequalities among groups. The concept of ideology connects closely with that of power, since ideological systems serve to legitimize the power that groups hold.
immigration • The movement of people into one country from another for the purpose of settlement.
impression management • Preparing for the presentation of one’s social role.
income • Payment, usually derived from wages, salaries, or investments.
industrialization • The emergence of machine production, based on the use of inanimate power resources (such as steam or electricity).
industrialized societies • Highly developed nation-states in which the majority of the population work in factories or offices rather than in agriculture, and most people live in urban areas.
infant mortality rate • The number of infants who die during the first year of life, per 1,000 live births.
infanticide • The intentional killing of a newborn. Female babies are more likely than male babies to be murdered in cultures that devalue women.
informal economy • Economic transactions carried on outside the sphere of formal paid employment.
informal networks • Relations that exist in groups and organizations developed on the basis of personal connections; ways of doing things that depart from formally recognized modes of procedure.
information society • A society no longer based primarily on the production of material goods but on the production of knowledge. The notion of the information society is closely bound up with the rise of information technology.
information technology • Forms of technology based on information processing and requiring microelectronic circuitry.
informed consent • The process whereby the study investigator informs potential participants about the risks and benefits involved in the research study. Informed consent must be obtained before an individual participates in a study.
in-group • A group toward which one feels particular loyalty and respect—the group to which “we” belong.
inner city • The areas composing the central neighborhoods of a city, as distinct from the suburbs. In many modern urban settings in industrialized nations inner-city areas are subject to dilapidation and decay, the more affluent residents having moved to outlying areas.
instinct • A fixed pattern of behavior that has genetic origins and that appears in all normal animals within a given species.
institutional capitalism • Capitalistic enterprise organized on the basis of institutional shareholding.
institutional racism • Patterns of discrimination based on ethnicity that have become structured into existing social institutions.
intelligence • Level of intellectual ability, particularly as measured by IQ (intelligence quotient) tests.
interactional vandalism • The deliberate subversion of the tacit rules of conversation.
interest group • A group organized to pursue specific interests in the political arena, operating primarily by lobbying the members of legislative bodies.
intergenerational mobility • Movement up or down a social stratification hierarchy from one generation to another.
intragenerational mobility • Movement up or down a social stratification hierarchy within the course of a personal career.
IQ (intelligence quotient) • A score attained on tests of symbolic or reasoning abilities.
iron law of oligarchy • A term coined by Weber’s student Robert Michels meaning that large organizations tend toward centralization of power, making democracy difficult.
 
kinship • A relation that links individuals through blood ties, marriage, or adoption. Kinship relations are by definition part of marriage and the family, but extend much more broadly. While in most modern societies few social obligations are involved in kinship relations extending beyond the immediate family, in other cultures kinship is of vital importance to social life.
knowledge economy • A society no longer based primarily on the production of material goods but based instead on the production of knowledge. Its emergence has been linked to the development of a broad base of consumers who are technologically literate and have made new advances in computing, entertainment, and telecommunications part of their lives.
knowledge society • Another common term for information society—a society based on the production and consumption of knowledge and information.
 
labeling theory • An approach to the study of deviance that suggests that people become “deviant” because certain labels are attached to their behavior by political authorities and others.
language • The primary vehicle of meaning and communication in a society, language is a system of symbols that represent objects and abstract thoughts.
latent functions • Functional consequences that are not intended or recognized by the members of a social system in which they occur.
law • A rule of behavior established by a political authority and backed by state power.
leader • A person who is able to influence the behavior of other members of a group.
liberal democracies • A type of representative democracy in which elected representatives hold power.
liberal feminism • Form of feminist theory that believes that gender inequality is produced by unequal access to civil rights and certain social resources, such as education and employment, based on sex. Liberal feminists tend to seek solutions through changes in legislation that ensure that the rights of individuals are protected.
liberation theology • An activist Catholic religious movement that combines Catholic beliefs with a passion for social justice for the poor.
life chances • A term introduced by Max Weber to signify a person’s opportunities for achieving economic prosperity.
life course • The various transitions and stages people experience during their lives.
life course theory • A perspective based on the assumptions that the aging process is shaped by historical time and place. Individuals make choices that reflect both opportunities and constraints. Aging is a lifelong process, and the relationships, events, and experiences of early life have consequences for later life.
life expectancy • The number of years the average person can expect to live.
life span • The maximum length of life that is biologically possible for a member of a given species.
linguistic relativity hypothesis • A hypothesis, based on the theories of Edward Sapir and Benjamin Lee Whorf, that perceptions are relative to language.
literacy • The ability to read and write.
local nationalisms • The beliefs that communities that share a cultural identity should have political autonomy, even within smaller units of a nation-state.
lower class • A social class composed of those who work part time or not at all and whose household income is typically low.
 
macrosociology • The study of large-scale groups, organizations, or social systems.
Malthusianism • A doctrine about population dynamics developed by Thomas Malthus, according to which population increase comes up against “natural limits,” represented by famine and war.
managerial capitalism • Capitalistic enterprises administered by managerial executives rather than by owners.
manifest functions • The functions of a particular social activity that are known to and intended by the individuals involved in the activity.
manufactured risk • Dangers that are created by the impact of human knowledge and technology on the natural world. Examples of manufactured risk include global warming and genetically modified foods.
market-oriented theories • Theories about economic development that assume that the best possible economic consequences will result if individuals are free to make their own economic decisions, uninhibited by governmental constraint.
marriage • A socially approved sexual relationship between two individuals. Through much of history, marriage involved two persons of opposite sexes, but in the past decade, same-sex couples have gained legal access to marriage in some parts of the world. Marriage normally forms the basis of a family of procreation—that is, it is expected that the married couple will produce and raise children. Some societies and subcultures permit polygamy, in which an individual may have more than one spouse at the same time.
Marxism • A body of thought deriving its main elements from Karl Marx’s ideas.
material goods • The physical objects that a society creates; these influence the ways in which people live.
materialist conception of history • The view developed by Marx, according to which material, or economic, factors have a prime role in determining historical change.
matrilocal family • A family system in which the husband is expected to live near the wife’s parents.
mean • A statistical measure of central tendency, or average, based on dividing a total by the number of individual cases.
means of production • The means whereby the production of material goods is carried on in a society, including not just technology but the social relations among producers.
measures of central tendency • The ways of calculating averages.
median • The number that falls halfway in a range of numbers—a way of calculating central tendency that is sometimes more useful than calculating a mean.
Medicare • A program under the U.S. Social Security Administration that reimburses hospitals and physicians for medical care provided to qualifying people over sixty-five years old.
megalopolis • The “city of all cities” in ancient Greece—used in modern times to refer to very large conurbations.
melting pot • The idea that ethnic differences can be combined to create new patterns of behavior drawing on diverse cultural sources.
microsociology • The study of human behavior in contexts of face-to-face interaction.
middle class • A social class composed broadly of those working in white-collar and lower managerial occupations.
minority group • A group of people who are in a minority in a given society and who, because of their distinct physical or cultural characteristics, find themselves in situations of inequality within that society. Also known as ethnic minority.
mode • The number that appears most often in a given set of data. This can sometimes be a helpful way of portraying central tendency.
modernization theory • A version of market-oriented development theory that argues that low-income societies develop economically only if they give up their traditional ways and adopt modern economic institutions, technologies, and cultural values that emphasize savings and productive investment.
monogamy • A form of marriage in which each married partner is allowed only one spouse at any given time.
monopoly • A situation in which a single firm dominates in a given industry.
mores • A subtype of norm; they are widely adhered to and have great moral or social significance. Violations are generally sanctioned strongly.
mortality • The number of deaths in a population.
multiculturalism • The viewpoint according to which ethnic groups can exist separately and share equally in economic and political life.
 
nationalism • A set of beliefs and symbols expressing identification with a national community.
nation-state • A particular type of state, characteristic of the modern world, in which a government has sovereign power within a defined territorial area, and the population are citizens who know themselves to be part of a single nation. Nation-states are closely associated with the rise of nationalism, although nationalist loyalties do not always conform to the boundaries of specific states. Nation-states developed as part of an emerging nation-state system, originating in Europe; in current times, they span the whole globe.
neoliberalism • The economic belief that free-market forces, achieved by minimizing government restrictions on business, provide the only route to economic growth.
network • A set of informal and formal social ties that links people to one another.
new criminology • A branch of criminological thought, prominent in Great Britain in the 1970s, that regarded deviance as deliberately chosen and often political in nature. The new criminologists argued that crime and deviance could be understood only in the context of power and inequality within society.
new-style terrorism • A recent form of terrorism characterized by global ambitions, loose global organizational ties, and a more ruthless attitude toward the violence the terrorists are willing to use.
nonverbal communication • Communication between individuals based on facial expression or bodily gestures rather than on language.
norms • Rules of conduct that specify appropriate behavior in a given range of social situations. A norm either prescribes a given type of behavior or forbids it. All human groups follow norms, which are always backed by sanctions of one kind or another— varying from informal disapproval to physical punishment.
nuclear family • A family group consisting of an adult or adult couple and their dependent children.
 
obesity • Excessive body weight indicated by a body mass index (BMI) over 30.
occupation • Any form of paid employment in which an individual regularly works.
old old • Sociological term for persons between the ages of seventy-five and eighty-four.
oldest old • Sociological term for persons age eighty-five and older.
old-style terrorism • A type of terrorism that is local and linked to particular states and has limited objectives, which means that the violence involved is fairly limited.
oligarchy • Rule by a small minority within an organization or society.
oligopoly • The domination of a small number of firms in a given industry.
oral history • Interviews with people about events they witnessed or experienced at some point earlier in their lives.
organic solidarity • According to Émile Durkheim, the social cohesion that results from the various parts of a society functioning as an integrated whole.
organization • A large group of individuals with a definite set of authority relations. Many types of organizations exist in industrialized societies, influencing most aspects of our lives. While not all organizations are bureaucratic, there are close links between the development of organizations and bureaucratic tendencies.
organized crime • Criminal activities carried out by organizations established as businesses.
out-group • A group toward which one feels antagonism and contempt—”those people.”
 
pariah groups • Groups that suffer from negative status discrimination—they are looked down on by most other members of society. The Jews, for example, have been a pariah group throughout much of European history.
participant observation • A method of research widely used in sociology and anthropology in which the researcher takes part in the activities of the group or community being studied. Also called fieldwork.
participatory democracy • A system of democracy in which all members of a group or community participate collectively in making major decisions.
pastoral societies • Societies whose subsistence derives from the rearing of domesticated animals.
patriarchy • The dominance of men over women. All known societies are patriarchal, although there are variations in the degree and nature of the power men exercise, as compared with women. One of the prime objectives of women’s movements in modern societies is to combat existing patriarchal institutions.
patrilocal family • A family system in which the wife is expected to live near the husband’s parents.
peer group • A friendship group composed of individuals of similar age and social status.
peripheral countries • Countries that have a marginal role in the world economy and are thus dependent on the core producing societies for their trading relationships.
personal space • The physical space individuals maintain between themselves and others.
personal troubles • Difficulties that are located in individual biographies and their immediate milieu, a seemingly private experience.
personality stabilization • According to the theory of functionalism, the family plays a crucial role in assisting its adult members emotionally. Marriage between adults is the arrangement through which adult personalities are supported and kept healthy.
pilot study • A trial run in survey research.
pluralism • A model for ethnic relations in which all ethnic groups in a society retain their independent and separate identities, yet share equally in the rights and powers of citizenship.
pluralist theories of modern democracy • Theories that emphasize the role of diverse and potentially competing interest groups, none of which dominate the political process.
political rights • Rights of political participation, such as the right to vote in local and national elections, held by citizens of a national community.
politics • The means by which power is employed to influence the nature and content of governmental activities. The sphere of the political includes the activities of those in government, but also the actions of others. There are many ways in which people outside the governmental apparatus seek to influence it.
polyandry • A form of marriage in which a woman may have two or more husbands simultaneously.
polygamy • A form of marriage in which a person may have two or more spouses simultaneously.
polygyny • A form of marriage in which a man may have two or more wives simultaneously.
postindustrial society • A postindustrial society is based on the production of information rather than material goods. According to postindustrialists, we are currently experiencing a series of social changes as profound as those that initiated the industrial era some 200 years ago.
postmodernism • The belief that society is no longer governed by history or progress. Postmodern society is highly pluralistic and diverse, with no “grand narrative” guiding its development.
poverty line • An official government measure to define those living in poverty in the United States.
power • The ability of individuals or the members of a group to achieve aims or further the interests they hold. Power is a pervasive element in all human relationships. Many conflicts in society are struggles over power, because how much power an individual or group is able to achieve governs how far they are able to put their wishes into practice.
power elite • Small networks of individuals who, according to C. Wright Mills, hold concentrated power in modern societies.
prejudice • The holding of preconceived ideas about an individual or group, ideas that are resistant to change even in the face of new information. Prejudice may be either positive or negative.
preoperational stage • According to Jean Piaget, a stage of human cognitive development in which the child has advanced sufficiently to master basic modes of logical thought.
primary deviance • According to Edwin Lemert, the actions that cause others to label one as a deviant.
primary group • A group that is characterized by intense emotional ties, face-to-face interaction, intimacy, and a strong, enduring sense of commitment.
primary socialization • The process by which children learn the cultural norms of the society into which they are born. Primary socialization occurs largely in the family.
profane • That which belongs to the mundane, everyday world.
proletariat • People who sell their labor for wages, according to Marx.
psychopath • A specific personality type; such individuals lack the moral sense and concern for others held by most normal people.
public issues • Difficulties or problems that are linked to the institutional and historical possibilities of social structure.
 
race • Differences in human physical characteristics used to categorize large numbers of individuals.
racialization • The process by which understandings of race are used to classify individuals or groups of people. Racial distinctions are more than ways of describing human differences; they are also important factors in the reproduction of patterns of power and inequality.
racism • The attribution of characteristics of superiority or inferiority to a population sharing certain physically inherited characteristics. Racism is a form of prejudice focusing on physical variations among people. Racist attitudes became entrenched during the period of Western colonial expansion, but also rest on mechanisms of prejudice and discrimination found in human societies today.
radical feminism • Form of feminist theory that believes that gender inequality is the result of male domination in all aspects of social and economic life.
random sampling • Sampling method in which a sample is chosen so that every member of the population has the same probability of being included.
rape • The forcing of non-consensual vaginal, oral, or anal intercourse.
rape culture • Social context where attitudes and norms perpetuate the treatment of women as sexual objects and instill in men a sense of sexual entitlement.
reference group • A group that provides a standard for judging one’s attitudes or behaviors.
refugee • A person who has fled his or her home due to a political, economic, or natural crisis.
regionalization • The division of social life into different regional settings or zones.
relative deprivation • The recognition that one has less than his or her peers.
relative poverty • Poverty defined according to the living standards of the majority in any given society.
religion • A set of beliefs adhered to by the members of a community, incorporating symbols regarded with a sense of awe or wonder together with ritual practices. Religions do not universally involve a belief in supernatural entities.
religious economy • A theoretical framework within the sociology of religion that argues that religions can be fruitfully understood as organizations in competition with one another for followers.
religious nationalism • The linking of strongly held religious convictions with beliefs about a people’s social and political destiny.
representative sample • A sample from a larger population that is statistically typical of that population.
resocialization • The process of learning new norms, values, and behaviors when one joins a new group or takes on a new social role, or when life circumstances change dramatically.
response cries • Seemingly involuntary exclamations individuals make when, for example, being taken by surprise, dropping something inadvertently, or expressing pleasure.
 
sacred • Describing something that inspires awe or reverence among those who believe in a given set of religious ideas.
sample • A small proportion of a larger population.
sampling • Studying a proportion of individuals or cases from a larger population as representative of that population as a whole.
sanction • A mode of reward or punishment that reinforces socially expected forms of behavior.
scapegoat • An individual or group blamed for wrongs that were not of their doing.
science • The disciplined marshaling of empirical data, combined with theoretical approaches and theories that illuminate or explain those data. Scientific activity combines the creation of new modes of thought with the careful testing of hypotheses and ideas. One major feature that helps distinguish science from other idea systems (such as religion) is the assumption that all scientific ideas are open to criticism and revision.
scientific racism • The use of scientific research or data to justify or reify beliefs about the superiority or inferiority of particular racial groups. Much of the “data” used to justify such claims is flawed or biased.
second shift • The excessive work hours borne by women relative to men; these hours are typically spent on domestic chores following the end of a day of work outside the home.
secondary deviance • According to Edwin Lemert, following the act of primary deviance, secondary deviation occurs when an individual accepts the label of deviant and acts accordingly.
secondary group • A group characterized by its large size and by impersonal, fleeting relationships.
sect • A religious movement that breaks away from orthodoxy.
secular thinking • Worldly thinking, particularly as seen in the rise of science, technology, and rational thought in general.
secularization • A process of decline in the influence of religion. Although modern societies have become increasingly secularized, tracing the extent of secularization is a complex matter. Secularization can refer to levels of involvement with religious organizations (such as rates of church attendance), the social and material influence wielded by religious organizations, and the degree to which people hold religious beliefs.
segregation • The practices of keeping racial and ethnic groups physically separate, thereby maintaining the superior position of the dominant group.
self-consciousness • Awareness of one’s distinct social identity as a person separate from others. Human beings are not born with self-consciousness but acquire an awareness of self as a result of early socialization. The learning of language is of vital importance to the processes by which the child learns to become a self-conscious being.
self-identity • The ongoing process of self-development and definition of our personal identity through which we formulate a unique sense of ourselves and our relationship to the world around us.
semiperipheral countries • Countries that supply sources of labor and raw materials to the core industrial countries and the world economy but are not themselves fully industrialized societies.
sensorimotor stage • According to Jean Piaget, a stage of human cognitive development in which the child’s awareness of his or her environment is dominated by perception and touch.
service society • A concept related to postindustrial society, it refers to a social order distinguished by the growth of service occupations at the expense of industrial jobs that produce material goods.
sex • The biological and anatomical differences distinguishing females from males.
sex segregation • The concentration of men and women in different jobs. These differences are believed to contribute to the gender pay gap.
sexual harassment • The making of unwanted sexual advances by one individual toward another, in which the first person persists even though it is clear that the other party is resistant.
sexual orientation • The direction of one’s sexual or romantic attraction.
shaming • A way of punishing criminal and deviant behavior based on rituals of public disapproval rather than incarceration. The goal of shaming is to maintain the ties of the offender to the community.
short-range downward mobility • Social mobility that occurs when an individual moves from one position in the class structure to another of nearly equal status.
sick role • A term associated with the functionalist Talcott Parsons to describe the patterns of behavior that a sick person adopts in order to minimize the disruptive impact of his or her illness on others.
signifier • Any vehicle of meaning and communication.
slavery • A form of social stratification in which some people are owned by others as their property.
social aggregate • A collection of people who happen to be together in a particular place but do not significantly interact or identify with one another.
social capital • The social knowledge and connections that enable people to accomplish their goals and extend their influence.
social category • People who share a common characteristic (such as gender or occupation) but do not necessarily interact or identify with one another.
social change • Alteration in basic structures of a social group or society. Social change is an ever-present phenomenon in social life, but has become especially intense in the modern era. The origins of modern sociology can be traced to attempts to understand the dramatic changes shattering the traditional world and promoting new forms of social order.
social class gradient in health • The strong inverse association between socioeconomic resources and risk of illness or death.
social conflict theories of aging • Arguments that emphasize the ways in which the larger social structure helps to shape the opportunities available to the elderly. Unequal opportunities are seen as creating the potential for conflict.
social constraint • The conditioning influence on our behavior by the groups and societies of which we are members. Social constraint was regarded by Émile Durkheim as one of the distinctive properties of social facts.
social construction of gender • The learning of gender roles through socialization and interaction with others.
social exclusion • The outcome of multiple deprivations that prevent individuals or groups from participating fully in the economic, social, and political life of the society in which they live.
social facts • According to Émile Durkheim, the aspects of social life that shape our actions as individuals. Durkheim believed that social facts could be studied scientifically.
social gerontologists • Social scientists who study aging and the elderly.
social group • A collection of people who regularly interact with one another on the basis of shared expectations concerning behavior and who share a sense of common identity.
social interaction • The process by which we act and react to those around us.
social mobility • Movement of individuals or groups among different social positions.
social position • The social identity an individual has in a given group or society. Social positions may be general in nature (those associated with gender roles) or may be more specific (occupational positions).
social reproduction • The process whereby societies have structural continuity over time. Social reproduction is an important pathway through which parents transmit or produce values, norms, and social practices among their children.
social rights • Rights of social and welfare provision held by all citizens in a national community, including, for example, the right to claim unemployment benefits and sickness payments provided by the state.
social roles • Socially defined expectations of an individual in a given status, or occupying a particular social position. In every society, individuals play a number of social roles, such as teenager, parent, worker, or political leader.
Social Security • A government program that provides economic assistance to persons faced with unemployment, disability, or old age.
social self • The basis of self-consciousness in human individuals, according to the theory of George Herbert Mead. The social self is the identity conferred upon an individual by the reactions of others. A person achieves self-consciousness by becoming aware of this social identity.
social stratification • The existence of structured inequalities among groups in society, in terms of their access to material or symbolic rewards. While all societies involve some forms of stratification, only with the development of state-based systems did wide differences in wealth and power arise. The most distinctive form of stratification in modern societies is class divisions.
socialization • The social processes through which we develop an awareness of social norms and values and achieve a distinct sense of self. Although socialization processes are particularly significant in infancy and childhood, they continue to some degree throughout life. None of us are immune from the reactions of others around us, which influence and modify our behavior at all phases of our life course.
socialization of nature • The process by which we control phenomena regarded as “natural,” such as reproduction.
society • A group of people who live in a particular territory, are subject to a common system of political authority, and are aware of having a distinct identity from other groups. Some societies, like hunting and gathering societies, are small, numbering no more than a few dozen people. Others are large, numbering millions—modern Chinese society, for instance, has a population of more than a billion people.
sociobiology • An approach that attempts to explain the behavior of both animals and human beings in terms of biological principles.
sociological imagination • The application of imaginative thought to the asking and answering of sociological questions. Someone using the sociological imagination “thinks himself away” from the familiar routines of daily life.
sociology • The study of human groups and societies, giving particular emphasis to analysis of the industrialized world. Sociology is one of a group of social sciences, which include anthropology, economics, political science, and human geography. The divisions among the various social sciences are not clear-cut, and all share a certain range of common interests, concepts, and methods.
sociology of the body • Field that focuses on how our bodies are affected by social influences. Health and illness, for instance, are shaped by social and cultural influences.
sovereignty • The undisputed political rule of a state over a given territorial area.
standard deviation • A way of calculating the spread of a group of figures.
standardized testing • A procedure whereby all students in a state take the same test under the same conditions.
state • A political apparatus (government institutions plus civil service officials) ruling over a given territorial order, whose authority is backed by law and the ability to use force. The emergence of the state marked a distinctive transition in human history, because the centralization of political power involved in state formation introduced new dynamics into processes of social change.
state-centered theories • Development theories that argue that appropriate government policies do not interfere with economic development, but rather can play a key role in bringing it about.
status • The social honor or prestige that a particular group is accorded by other members of a society. Status groups normally display distinct styles of life—patterns of behavior that the members of a group follow. Status privilege may be positive or negative. Pariah status groups are regarded with disdain or treated as outcasts by the majority of the population.
stepfamily • A family in which at least one partner has children from a previous marriage.
stereotype • A fixed and inflexible category.
stigma • Any physical or social characteristic that is labeled by society as undesirable.
strike • A temporary stoppage of work by a group of employees in order to express a grievance or enforce a demand.
structural strain • Tensions that produce conflicting interests within societies.
structuration • The two-way process by which we shape our social world through our individual actions and by which we are reshaped by society.
structure • The recurrent patterned arrangements and hierarchies that influence or limit the choices and opportunities available to us.
subculture • Values and norms distinct from those of the majority, held by a group within a wider society.
suburbanization • The development of suburbia, areas of housing outside inner cities.
suffrage • A legal right to vote guaranteed by the Fifteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution; guaranteed to women by the Nineteenth Amendment.
suffragettes • Members of early women’s movements who pressed for equal voting rights for women and men.
surplus value • In Marxist theory, the value of a worker’s labor power left over when an employer has repaid the cost of hiring the worker.
survey • A method of sociological research in which questionnaires are administered to the population being studied.
sustainable development • The notion that economic growth should proceed only insofar as natural resources are recycled rather than depleted; biodiversity is maintained; and clean air, water, and land are protected.
symbol • One item used to stand for or represent another—as in the case of a flag, which symbolizes a nation.
symbolic interactionism • A theoretical approach in sociology developed by George Herbert Mead that emphasizes the role of symbols and language as core elements of all human interaction.
 
target hardening • Practical measures used to limit a criminal’s ability to commit crime, such as community policing and use of house alarms.
technology • The application of knowledge of the material world to production; the creation of material instruments (such as machines) used in human interaction with nature.
terrorism • Use of attacks on civilians designed to persuade a government to alter its policies, or to damage its standing in the world.
theism • A belief in one or more supernatural deities.
theoretical questions • Questions posed by sociologists when seeking to explain a particular range of observed events. The asking of theoretical questions is crucial to allowing us to generalize about the nature of social life.
theory of racial formation • The process by which social, economic, and political forces determine the content and importance of racial categories.
time-space • When and where events occur.
tracking • Dividing students into groups according to ability.
transactional leader • A leader who is concerned with accomplishing the group’s tasks, getting group members to do their jobs, and making certain that the group achieves its goals.
transformational leader • A leader who is able to instill in the members of a group a sense of mission or higher purpose, thereby changing the nature of the group itself.
transnational corporations • Business corporations located in two or more countries.
triad • A group consisting of three persons.
triangulation • The use of multiple research methods as a way of producing more reliable empirical data than are available from any single method.
 
underclass • A class of individuals situated at the bottom of the class system, often composed of people from ethnic minority backgrounds.
unfocused interaction • Interaction occurring among people present in a particular setting but not engaged in direct face-to-face communication.
Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) • Documents that contain official data on crime that are reported to law enforcement agencies that then provide the data to the FBI.
union • An organization that advances and protects the interests of workers with respect to working conditions, wages, and benefits.
universal health coverage • Public health care programs motivated by the goal of providing affordable health services to all members of a population.
upper class • A social class broadly composed of the more affluent members of society, especially those who have inherited wealth, own businesses, or hold large numbers of stocks (shares).
urban ecology • An approach to the study of urban life based on an analogy with the adjustment of plants and organisms to the physical environment. According to ecological theorists, the various neighborhoods and zones within cities are formed as a result of natural processes of adjustment on the part of populations as they compete for resources.
urban renewal • The process of renovating deteriorating neighborhoods by encouraging the renewal of old buildings and the construction of new ones.
urbanism • A term used by Louis Wirth to denote distinctive characteristics of urban social life, such as its impersonal or alienating nature.
urbanization • The development of towns and cities.
 
values • Ideas held by individuals or groups about what is desirable, proper, good, and bad. What individuals value is strongly influenced by the specific culture in which they happen to live.
 
wealth • Money and material possessions held by an individual or group.
welfare capitalism • Practice in which large corporations protect their employees from the vicissitudes of the market.
welfare state • A political system that provides a wide range of welfare benefits for its citizens.
white-collar crime • Criminal activities carried out by those in white-collar, or professional, jobs.
work • The activity by which people produce from the natural world and so ensure their survival. Work should not be thought of exclusively as paid employment. In traditional cultures, there was only a rudimentary monetary system, and few people worked for money. In modern societies, there remain types of work that do not involve direct payment (for example, housework).
working class • A social class broadly composed of people working in blue-collar, or manual, occupations.
working poor • People who work, but whose earnings are not enough to lift them above the poverty line.
world-systems theory • Pioneered by Immanuel Wallerstein, this theory emphasizes the interconnections among countries based on the expansion of a capitalist world economy. This economy is made up of core countries, semiperipheral countries, and peripheral countries.
 
young old • Sociological term for persons between the ages of sixty-five and seventy-four.
