Absolute poverty :  the point at which a household’s income falls below the necessary level to purchase food to physically sustain its members.
Achieved status :  a status into which one enters; voluntary status.
Affirmative action :  a set of policies that grant preferential treatment to a number of particular subgroups within the population—typically, women and historically disadvantaged racial minorities.
Agricultural revolution :  the period around 1700 marked by the introduction of new farming technologies that increased food output in farm production.
Alienation :  a condition in which people are dominated by forces of their own creation that then confront them as alien powers; according to Marx, the basic state of being in a capitalist society.
Alterative social movements :  social movements that seek the most limited societal change and often target a narrow group of people.
Altruism :  an action that benefits a group but does not directly benefit the individual performing the action.
Altruistic suicide :  suicide that occurs when one experiences too much social integration.
Animism :  the belief that spirits are part of the natural world, as in totemism.
Anomic suicide :  suicide that occurs as a result of insufficient social regulation.
Anomie :  a sense of aimlessness or despair that arises when we can no longer reasonably expect life to be predictable; too little social regulation; normlessness.
Ascribed status :  a status into which one is born; involuntary status.
Association :  see correlation.
Authority :  the justifiable right to exercise power.
Biological determinism :  a line of thought that explains social behavior in terms of who you are in the natural world.
Boundary work :  work done to maintain the border between legitimate and nonlegitimate science within a specific scientific discipline or between legitimate disciplines.
Bourgeois society :  a society of commerce (modern capitalist society, for example) in which the maximization of profit is the primary business incentive.
Bourgeoisie :  the capitalist class.
Broken windows theory of deviance :  theory explaining how social context and social cues impact whether individuals act deviantly; specifically, whether local, informal social norms allow deviant acts.
Bureaucracy :  a legal-rational organization or mode of administration that governs with reference to formal rules and roles and emphasizes meritocracy.
Capitalism :  an economic system in which property and goods are primarily privately owned; investments are determined by private decisions; and prices, production, and the distribution of goods are determined primarily by competition in an unfettered marketplace.
Case study :  an intensive investigation of one particular unit of analysis in order to describe it or uncover its mechanisms.
Caste system :  a religion-based system of stratification characterized by no social mobility.
Causality :  the notion that a change in one factor results in a corresponding change in another.
Charismatic authority :  authority that rests on the personal appeal of an individual leader.
Churches :  religious bodies that coexist in a relatively low state of tension with their social surroundings. They have mainstream, “safe” beliefs and practices relative to those of the general population.
Citizenship rights :  the rights guaranteed to each law-abiding citizen in a nation-state.
Civil rights :  the rights guaranteeing a citizen’s personal freedom from interference, including freedom of speech and the right to travel freely.
Class system :  an economically based hierarchical system characterized by cohesive, oppositional groups and somewhat loose social mobility.
Classical model :  model of social movements based on a concept of structural weakness in society that results in the psychological disruption of individuals.
Coalescence :  the second stage of a social movement, in which resources are mobilized (that is, concrete action is taken) around the problems outlined in the first stage.
Coercion :  the use of force to get others to do what you want.
Cohabitation :  living together in an intimate relationship without formal legal or religious sanctioning.
Collective action :  action that takes place in groups and diverges from the social norms of the situation.
Collective action problem :  the difficulty in organizing large groups because of the tendency of some individuals to freeload or slack off.
Collective resistance :  an organized effort to change a power hierarchy on the part of a less-powerful group in a society.
Communism :  a political ideology of a classless society in which the means of production are shared through state ownership and in which rewards are tied not to productivity but to need.
Comparative research :  a methodology by which two or more entities (such as countries), which are similar in many dimensions but differ on one in question, are compared to learn about the dimension that differs between them.
Conflict theory :  the idea that conflict between competing interests is the basic, animating force of social change and society in general.
Conformist :  individual who accepts both the goals and strategies to achieve them that are considered socially acceptable.
Congregation :  a group of people who gather together, especially for worship.
Consumerism :  the steady acquisition of material possessions, often with the belief that happiness and fulfillment can thus be achieved.
Contagion theory :  theory of collective action claiming that collective action arises because of people’s tendency to conform to the behavior of others with whom they are in close contact.
Content analysis :  a systematic analysis of the content rather than the structure of a communication, such as a written work, speech, or film.
Contradictory class locations :  the idea that people can occupy locations in the class structure that fall between the two “pure” classes.
Convergence theory :  theory of collective action stating that collective action happens when people with similar ideas and tendencies gather in the same place.
Corporate crime :  a particular type of white-collar crime committed by the officers (CEOs and other executives) of a corporation.
Corporation :  a legal entity unto itself that has a legal personhood distinct from that of its members—namely, its owners and shareholders.
Correlation or association :  simultaneous variation in two variables.
Credentialism :  an overemphasis on credentials (e.g., college degrees) for signaling social status or qualifications for a job.
Crime :  the violation of laws enacted by society.
Cult :  religious movement that makes some new claim about the supernatural and therefore does not easily fit within the sect–church cycle.
Cult of domesticity :  the notion that true womanhood centers on domestic responsibility and child rearing.
Cultural capital :  the symbolic and interactional resources that people use to their advantage in various situations.
Cultural relativism :  taking into account the differences across cultures without passing judgment or assigning value.
Cultural scripts :  modes of behavior and understanding that are not universal or natural.
Culture :  a set of beliefs, traditions, and practices; the sum of the social categories and concepts we embrace in addition to beliefs, behaviors (except instinctual ones), and practices; everything but the natural environment around us.
Culture jamming :  the act of turning media against themselves.
Culture of poverty :  the argument that poor people adopt certain practices that differ from those of middle-class, “mainstream” society in order to adapt and survive in difficult economic circumstances.
Deductive approach :  a research approach that starts with a theory, forms a hypothesis, makes empirical observations, and then analyzes the data to confirm, reject, or modify the original theory.
Democracy :  a system of government wherein power theoretically lies with the people; citizens are allowed to vote in elections, speak freely, and participate as legal equals in social life.
Denomination :  a group of congregations that share the same faith and are governed under one administrative umbrella.
Dependent variable :  the outcome that the researcher is trying to explain.
Deterrence theory :  philosophy of criminal justice arising from the notion that crime results from a rational calculation of its costs and benefits.
Dialectic :  a two-directional relationship following a pattern in which an original statement or thesis is countered with an antithesis, leading to a conclusion that unites the strengths of the original position and the counterarguments.
Dictatorship :  a form of government that restricts the right to political participation to a small group or even to a single individual.
Discrimination :  harmful or negative acts (not mere thoughts) against people deemed inferior on the basis of their racial category, without regard to their individual merit.
Divide et impera :  the role of a member of a triad who intentionally drives a wedge between the other two actors in the group.
Domination :  the probability that a command with specific content will be obeyed by a given group of people.
Double consciousness :  a concept conceived by W. E. B. Du Bois to describe the two behavioral scripts, one for moving through the world and the other incorporating the external opinions of prejudiced onlookers, which are constantly maintained by African Americans.
Dramaturgical theory :  the view (advanced by Erving Goffman) of social life as essentially a theatrical performance, in which we are all actors on metaphorical stages, with roles, scripts, costumes, and sets.
Dyad :  a group of two.
Education :  the process through which academic, social, and cultural ideas and tools, both general and specific, are developed.
Egoistic suicide :  suicide that occurs when one is not well integrated into a social group.
Elite–mass dichotomy system :  a system of stratification that has a governing elite, a few leaders who broadly hold power in society.
Embeddedness :  the degree to which ties are reinforced through indirect paths within a social network.
Emergence :  the first stage of a social movement, occurring when the social problem being addressed is first identified.
Emergent norm theory :  theory of collective action emphasizing the influence of keynoters in promoting new behavioral norms.
Endogamy :  marriage to someone within one’s social group.
Equality of condition :  the idea that everyone should have an equal starting point.
Equality of opportunity :  the idea that everyone has an equal chance to achieve wealth, social prestige, and power because the rules of the game, so to speak, are the same for everyone.
Equality of outcome :  the idea that each player must end up with the same amount regardless of the fairness of the “game.”
Essentialism :  a line of thought that explains social phenomena in terms of natural ones.
Estate system :  a politically based system of stratification characterized by limited social mobility.
Ethicalism :  the adherence to certain principles to lead a moral life, as in Buddhism and Taoism.
Ethnicity :  one’s ethnic quality or affiliation. It is voluntary, self-defined, nonhierarchal, fluid and multiple, and based on cultural differences, not physical ones per se.
Ethnocentrism :  the belief that one’s own culture or group is superior to others, and the tendency to view all other cultures from the perspective of one’s own.
Ethnomethodology :  literally “the methods of the people”; this approach to studying human interaction focuses on the ways in which we make sense of our world, convey this understanding to others, and produce a shared social order.
Eugenics :  literally meaning “well born;” a pseudoscience that postulates that controlling the fertility of populations could influence inheritable traits passed on from generation to generation.
Evangelicals :  members of any Protestant denomination distinguished by four main beliefs: The Bible is without error, salvation comes only through belief in Jesus Christ, personal conversion is the only path to salvation (the “born again” experience), and others must also be converted. They proselytize by engaging with wider society.
Exchange mobility :  mobility in which, if we hold fixed the changing distribution of jobs, individuals trade jobs not one-to-one but in a way that ultimately balances out.
Exogamy :  marriage to someone outside one’s social group.
Experimental methods :  methods that seek to alter the social landscape in a very specific way for a given sample of individuals and then track what results that change yields; often involve comparisons to a control group that did not experience such an intervention.
Extended family :  kin networks that extend outside or beyond the nuclear family.
Face :  the esteem in which an individual is held by others.
Family wage :  a wage paid to male workers sufficient to support a dependent wife and children.
Fatalistic suicide :  suicide that occurs as a result of too much social regulation.
Feminism :  a consciousness-raising movement to get people to understand that gender is an organizing principle of life. The underlying belief is that women and men should be accorded equal opportunities and respect.
Feminist methodology :  a set of systems or methods that treat women’s experiences as legitimate empirical and theoretical resources, that promote social sciences for women (think public sociology, but for a specific half of the public), and that take into account the researcher as much as the overt subject matter.
Feudalism :  a precapitalist economic system characterized by the presence of lords, vassals, serfs, and fiefs.
Formal social sanctions :  mechanisms of social control by which rules or laws prohibit deviant criminal behavior.
Free rider problem :  the notion that when more than one person is responsible for getting something done, the incentive is for each individual to shirk responsibility and hope others will pull the extra weight.
Functionalism :  the theory that various social institutions and processes in society exist to serve some important (or necessary) function to keep society running.
Fundamentalists :  religious adherents who follow a scripture (such as the Bible or Qur’an) using a literal interpretation of its meaning.
Game theory :  the study of strategic decisions made under conditions of uncertainty and interdependence.
Gender :  a social position; the set of social arrangements that are built around normative sex categories.
Gender roles :  sets of behavioral norms assumed to accompany one’s status as male or female.
Generalizability :  the extent to which we can claim our findings inform us about a group larger than the one we studied.
Generalized other :  an internalized sense of the total expectations of others in a variety of settings— regardless of whether we’ve encountered those people or places before.
Genocide :  the mass killing of a group of people based on racial, ethnic, or religious traits.
Glass ceiling :  an invisible limit on women’s climb up the occupational ladder.
Glass escalator :  the accelerated promotion of men to the top of a work organization, especially in feminized jobs.
Global warming :  rising atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, resulting in higher global average temperatures.
Grassroots organization :  a type of social movement organization that relies on high levels of community-based participation to promote social change. It lacks a hierarchical structure and works through existing political structures.
Hegemonic masculinity :  the condition in which men are dominant and privileged, and this dominance and privilege is invisible.
Hegemony :  a condition by which a dominant group uses its power to elicit the voluntary “consent” of the masses.
Hidden curriculum :  the nonacademic and less overt socialization functions of schooling.
Historical methods :  research that collects data from written reports, newspaper articles, journals, transcripts, television programs, diaries, artwork, and other artifacts that date back to the period under study.
Homosexual :  the social identity of a person who has sexual attraction to and/or relations with other persons of the same sex.
Hypothesis :  a proposed relationship between two variables.
I :  one’s sense of agency, action, or power.
Ideology :  a system of concepts and relationships, an understanding of cause and effect.
Income :  money received by a person for work, from transfers (gifts, inheritances, or government assistance), or from returns on investments.
Independent variable :  a measured factor that the researcher believes has a causal impact on the dependent variable.
Inductive approach :  a research approach that starts with empirical observations and then works to form a theory.
Informal social sanctions :  the usually unexpressed but widely known rules of group membership; the unspoken rules of social life.
In-group :  another term for the powerful group, most often the majority.
Innovator :  social deviant who accepts socially acceptable goals but rejects socially acceptable means to achieve them.
Institutional racism :  institutions and social dynamics that may seem race-neutral but actually disadvantage minority groups.
Institutionalization :  see routinization.
Interest group :  an organization that seeks to gain power in government and influence policy without campaigning for direct election or appointment to office.
International state system :  a system in which each state is recognized as territorially sovereign by fellow states.
Isomorphism :  a constraining process that forces one unit in a population to resemble other units that face the same set of environmental conditions.
Kinship networks :  strings of relationships between people related by blood and co-residence (that is, marriage).
Labeling theory :  the belief that individuals subconsciously notice how others see or label them, and their reactions to those labels over time form the basis of their self-identity.
Large group :  a group characterized by the presence of a formal structure that mediates interaction and, consequently, status differentiation.
Legal-rational authority :  authority based on legal, impersonal rules; the rules rule.
Macrosociology :  a branch of sociology generally concerned with social dynamics at a higher level of analysis—that is, across the breadth of a society.
Master status :  one status within a set that stands out or overrides all others.
Material culture :  everything that is a part of our constructed, physical environment, including technology.
Matthew effect :  a term used by sociologists to describe the notion that certain scientific results get more notoriety and influence based on the existing prestige of the researchers involved.
Me :  the self as perceived as an object by the “I”; the self as one imagines others perceive one.
Mechanical or segmental solidarity :  social cohesion based on sameness.
Media :  any formats, platforms, or vehicles that carry, present, or communicate information.
Mediator :  the member of a triad who attempts to resolve conflict between the two other actors in the group.
Medicalization :  the process by which problems or issues not traditionally seen as medical come to be framed as such.
Megachurch :  typically, a conservative Protestant church that attracts at least 2,000 worshippers per week.
Meritocracy :  a society where status and mobility are based on individual attributes, ability, and achievement; a society that assigns social status, power, and economic rewards on achievement, not ascribed, personal attributes or favoritism.
Microsociology :  a branch of sociology that seeks to understand local interactional contexts; its methods of choice are ethnographic, generally including participant observation and in-depth interviews.
Middle class :  a term commonly used to describe those individuals with nonmanual jobs that pay significantly more than the poverty line—though this is a highly debated and expansive category, particularly in the United States, where broad swathes of the population consider themselves middle class.
Midrange theory :  a theory that attempts to predict how certain social institutions tend to function.
Milgram experiment :  An experiment devised in 1961 by Stanley Milgram, a psychologist at Yale University, to see how far ordinary people would go to obey a scientific authority figure.
Miscegenation :  the technical term for multiracial marriage; literally meaning “a mixing of kinds”; because the term is politically and historically charged, sociologists generally prefer exogamy or outmarriage.
Modernity :  social relations characterized by rationality, bureaucratization, and objectivity—as well as individuality created by nonconcentric, but overlapping, group affiliations.
Monogamy :  the practice of having only one sexual partner or spouse at a time.
Monopoly :  when one seller of a good or service dominates the market to the exclusion of others, potentially leading to zero competition.
Morbidity :  illness in a general sense.
Mortality :  death.
Narrative :  the sum of stories contained in a set of ties.
Nativism :  the movement to protect and preserve indigenous land or culture from the allegedly dangerous and polluting effects of new immigrants.
Nonmaterial culture :  values, beliefs, behaviors, and social norms.
Normal science :  science conducted within an existing paradigm, as defined by Thomas Kuhn.
Normative view of science :  the notion that science should be unaffected by the personal beliefs or values of scientists but rather follow objective rules of evidence.
Norms :  how values tell us to behave.
Nuclear family :  familial form consisting of a father, a mother, and their children.
Offshoring :  a business decision to move all or part of a company’s operations abroad to minimize costs.
Oligopoly :  the economic condition that exists when a handful of firms effectively control a particular market.
One-drop rule :  the belief that “one drop” of black blood makes a person black, a concept that evolved from U. S. laws forbidding miscegenation.
Ontological equality :  the philosophical and religious notion that all people are created equal at birth.
Operationalization :  the process of assigning a precise method for measuring a term being examined for use in a particular study.
Organic solidarity :  social cohesion based on difference and interdependence of the parts.
Organization :  any social network that is defined by a common purpose and has a boundary between its membership and the rest of the social world.
Organizational culture :  the shared beliefs and behaviors within a social group; often used interchangeably with corporate culture.
Organizational structure :  the ways in which power and authority are distributed within an organization.
Other :  someone or something outside of oneself.
Out-group :  another term for the stigmatized or less powerful group, the minority.
Panopticon :  a circular building composed of an inner ring and an outer ring designed to serve as a prison in which the guards, housed in the inner ring, can observe the prisoners without the detainees knowing whether they are being watched.
Paradigm :  the framework within which scientists operate.
Paradigm shift or scientific revolution :  when enough scientific anomalies accrue to challenge the existing paradigm, showing that it is incomplete or inadequate to explain all observed phenomena.
Paradox of authority :  although the state’s authority derives from the implicit threat of physical force; resorting to physical coercion strips the state of all legitimate authority.
Parenting stress hypothesis :  low income, unstable employment, a lack of cultural resources, and a feeling of inferiority from social class comparisons exacerbate household stress levels; this stress, in turn, leads to detrimental parenting practices such as yelling, shouting, and hitting, which are not conducive to healthy child development.
Participant observation :  a qualitative research method that seeks to uncover the meanings people give their social actions by observing their behavior in practice.
Party :  a group that is similar to a small group but is multifocal.
Patriarchy :  a nearly universal system involving the subordination of femininity to masculinity.
Perverse incentives :  reward structures that lead to suboptimal outcomes by stimulating counterproductive behavior; for example, welfare—to the extent that it discourages work efforts—is argued to have perverse incentives.
Pluralism :  the presence and engaged coexistence of numerous distinct groups in one society.
Political participation :  any activity that has the intent or effect of influencing government action.
Political party :  an organization that seeks to gain power in a government, generally by backing candidates for office who subscribe (to the extent possible) to the organization’s political ideals.
Political process model :  model of social movements that focuses on the structure of political opportunities. When these are favorable to a particular challenger, the chances are better for the success of a social movement led by this challenger.
Political rights :  the rights guaranteeing a citizen’s ability to participate in politics, including the right to vote and the right to hold an elected office.
Politics :  power relations among people or other social actors.
Polyandry :  the practice of having multiple husbands simultaneously.
Polygamy :  the practice of having more than one sexual partner or spouse at a time.
Polygyny :  the practice of having multiple wives simultaneously.
Population :  an entire group of individual persons, objects, or items from which samples may be drawn.
Positivist sociology :  a strain within sociology that believes the social world can be described and predicted by certain describable relationships (akin to a social physics).
Postmodernism :  a condition characterized by a questioning of the notion of progress and history, the replacement of narrative within pastiche, and multiple, perhaps even conflicting, identities resulting from disjointed affiliations.
Postmodernity :  social relations characterized by a questioning of the notion of progress and history, the replacement of narrative with pastiche, and multiple, perhaps even conflicting, identities resulting from disjointed affiliations.
Power :  the ability to carry out one’s own will despite resistance.
Prejudice :  thoughts and feelings about an ethnic or racial group.
Premodernity :  social relations characterized by concentric circles of social affiliation, a low degree of division of labor, relatively undeveloped technology, and traditional social norms.
Primary deviance :  the first act of rule-breaking that may incur a label of “deviant” and thus influence how people think about and act toward you.
Primary groups :  social groups, such as family or friends, composed of enduring, intimate face-to-face relationships that strongly influence the attitudes and ideals of those involved.
Primordialism :  Clifford Geertz’s term to explain the strength of ethnic ties because they are fixed in deeply felt or primordial ties to one’s homeland culture.
Profane :  the things of mundane, everyday life.
Proletariat :  the working class.
Qualitative methods :  methods that attempt to collect information about the social world that cannot be readily converted to numeric form.
Quantitative methods :  methods that seek to obtain information about the social world that is already in or can be converted to numeric form.
Race :  a group of people who share a set of characteristics—typically, but not always, physical ones— and are said to share a common bloodline.
Racialization :  the formation of a new racial identity by drawing ideological boundaries of difference around a formerly unnoticed group of people.
Racism :  the belief that members of separate races possess different and unequal traits.
Rationalization :  an ever-expanding process of ordering or organizing.
Rebel :  individual who rejects both traditional goals and traditional means and wants to alter or destroy the social institutions from which he or she is alienated.
Recidivism :  when an individual who has been involved with the criminal justice system reverts to criminal behavior.
Redemptive social movements :  social movements that target specific groups but advocate for more radical social change in behavior.
Reference group :  a group that helps us understand or make sense of our position in society relative to other groups.
Reflection theory :  the idea that culture is a projection of social structures and relationships into the public sphere, a screen onto which the film of the underlying reality or social structures of a society is projected.
Reflexive spirituality :  a contemporary religious movement that encourages followers to look to religion for meaning, wisdom, and profound thought and feeling rather than for absolute truths on how the world works.
Reflexivity :  analyzing and critically considering our own role in, and effect on, our research.
Reformative social movements :  social movements that advocate for limited social change across an entire society.
Relative poverty :  a measurement of poverty based on a percentage of the median income in a given location.
Reliability :  the likelihood of obtaining consistent results using the same measure.
Religion :  a system of beliefs, traditions, and practices around sacred things; a set of shared “stories” that guide belief and action.
Religious experience :  an individual’s spiritual feelings, acts, and experiences.
Research methods :  approaches that social scientists use for investigating the answers to questions.
Resocialization :  the process by which one’s sense of social values, beliefs, and norms are reengineered, often deliberately, through an intense social process that may take place in a total institution.
Resource dilution model :  hypothesis stating that parental resources are finite and that each additional child gets a smaller amount of them.
Resource-mobilization theory :  model of social movements that emphasizes political context and goals but also states that social movements are unlikely to emerge without the necessary resources.
Retreatist :  one who rejects both socially acceptable means and goals by completely retreating from, or not participating in, society.
Reverse causality :  a situation in which the researcher believes that A results in a change in B, but B, in fact, is causing A.
Revolutionary social movements :  social movements that advocate the radical reorganization of society.
Risk society :  a society that both produces and is concerned with mitigating risks, especially manufactured risks (ones that result from human activity).
Ritualist :  individual who rejects socially defined goals but not the means.
Role :  the duties and behaviors expected of someone who holds a particular status.
Role conflict :  the tension caused by competing demands between two or more roles pertaining to different statuses.
Role strain :  the incompatibility among roles corresponding to a single status.
Routinization :  or institutionalization the final stage of a social movement, in which it is institutionalized and a formal structure develops to promote the cause; the clear, rule-governed procedures used repeatedly for decision making.
institutionalization : eant put to special use for worship and kept separate from the profane; the sacred realm is unknowable and mystical, so it inspires us with feelings of awe and wonder.
Sacred :  canopy Peter Berger’s term to describe the entire set of religious norms, symbols, and beliefs that express the most important thing in life—namely, the feeling that life is worth living and that reality is meaningful and ordered, not just random chaos.
Sacred canopy : bset of the population from which you are actually collecting data.
Sample : ific racism nineteenth-century theories of race that characterize a period of feverish investigation into the origins, explanations, and classifications of race.
Scientific racism : tion see paradigm shift.
Scientific revolution : responsibility for housework and child care—everything from cooking dinner, to doing laundry, bathing children, reading bedtime stories, and sewing Halloween costumes.
Second shift : viance subsequent acts of rule-breaking that occur after primary deviance and as a result of your new deviant label and people’s expectations of you.
Secondary deviance : roups marked by impersonal, instrumental relationships (those existing as a means to an end).
Secondary groups : an groups high-tension organizations that don’t fit well within the existing social environment. They are usually most attractive to society’s least privileged—outcasts, minorities, or the poor—because they downplay worldly pleasure by stressing otherworldly promises.
Sects : arism a general movement away from religiosity and spiritual belief toward a rational, scientific orientation, a trend adopted by industrialized nations in the form of separation of church and state.
sectarian groups : rity see mechanical solidarity.
Secularism : n the legal or social practice of separating people on the basis of their race or ethnicity.
Segmental solidarity : identity of a person as perceived by that same person.
Segregation : tor the section of the economy that involves providing intangible services.
Self : the biological differences that distinguish males from females.
Service sector : y Talcott Parsons’s theory that men and women perform their sex roles as breadwinners and wives/mothers, respectively, because the nuclear family is the ideal arrangement in modern societies, fulfilling the function of reproducing workers.
Sex : ism occurs when a person’s sex or gender is the basis for judgment, discrimination, and hatred against him or her.
Sex role theory : nt an illegal form of discrimination, involving everything from inappropriate jokes on the job to outright sexual assault to sexual “barter”—all intended to make women feel uncomfortable and unwelcome, particularly on the job.
Sexism : ity desire, sexual preference, and sexual identity and behavior.
Sexual harassment :  describing the social rights and obligations of a sick individual.
Sexuality : up a group characterized by face-to-face interaction, a unifocal perspective, lack of formal arrangements or roles, and a certain level of equality.
Sick role : pital the information, knowledge of people or things, and connections that help individuals enter, gain power in, or otherwise leverage social networks.
Small group : s or socioeconomic status an individual’s position in a stratified social order.
Social capital : n social bonds; how well people relate to each other and get along on a day-to-day basis.
Social class : ruction an entity that exists because people behave as if it exists and whose existence is perpetuated as people and social institutions act in accordance with the widely agreed-upon formal rules or informal norms of behavior associated with that entity.
socioeconomic status : nisms that create normative compliance in individuals.
Social cohesion : m the application of Darwinian ideas to society—namely, the evolutionary “survival of the fittest.”
Social construction :  transgression of socially established norms.
Social control : y a condition in which no differences in wealth, power, prestige, or status based on nonnatural conventions exist.
Social Darwinism : on a complex group of interdependent positions that, together, perform a social role and reproduce themselves over time; also defined in a narrow sense as any institution in a society that works to shape the behavior of the groups or people within it.
Social deviance : ion how well you are integrated into your social group or community.
Social equality :  the movement between different positions within a system of social stratification in any given society.
Social institution : llective behavior that is purposeful, organized, and institutionalized but not ritualized.
Social integration : ganization a group developed to recruit new members and coordinate participation in a particular social movement; these groups also often raise money, clarify goals, and structure participation in the movement.
Social mobility : a set of relations—essentially, a set of dyads—held together by ties between individuals.
Social movement : on the number of rules guiding your daily life and, more specifically, what you can reasonably expect from the world on a day-to-day basis.
Social movement organization : ranteeing a citizen’s protection by the state.
Social network : conomic system in which most or all of the needs of the population are met through nonmarket methods of distribution.
Social regulation :  process by which individuals internalize the values, beliefs, and norms of a given society and learn to function as members of that society.
Social rights :  status see social class.
Socialism : cal imagination the ability to connect the most basic, intimate aspects of an individual’s life to seemingly impersonal and remote historical forces.
Socialization :  study of human society.
Socioeconomic status : ained through the use of cultural attractiveness rather than the threat of coercive action (hard power).
Sociological imagination : ss of breaking up work into specific, delimited tasks.
Sociology : defined by Max Weber, “a human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory.”
Soft power : ecognizable social position that an individual occupies.
Specialization : hy system a system of stratification based on social prestige.
State : s set all the statuses one holds simultaneously.
Status : -attainment model approach that ranks individuals by socioeconomic status, including income and educational attainment, and seeks to specify the attributes characteristic of people who end up in more desirable occupations.
Status hierarchy system : members of a negatively stereotyped group are placed in a situation where they fear they may confirm those stereotypes.
Status set : egative social label that not only changes others’ behavior toward a person but also alters that person’s own self-concept and social identity.
Status-attainment model : ion Robert Parks’s 1920 universal and linear model for how immigrants assimilate: They first arrive, then settle in, and achieve full assimilation in a newly homogenous country.
Stereotype threat : ert Merton’s theory that deviance occurs when a society does not give all of its members equal ability to achieve socially acceptable goals.
Stigma :  crime crime committed in public and often associated with violence, gangs, and poverty.
Straight-line assimilation : notion that relatively weak ties often turn out to be quite valuable because they yield new information.
Strain theory : nctionalism theoretical tradition claiming that every society has certain structures (the family, the division of labor, or gender) that exist to fulfill some set of necessary functions (reproduction of the species, production of goods, etc.).
Street crime : ole a gap between network clusters, or even two individuals, if those individuals (or clusters) have complementary resources.
Strength of weak ties : obility that is inevitable from changes in the economy.
Structural functionalism :  oppressed group of people.
Structural hole : distinct cultural values and behavioral patterns of a particular group in society; a group united by sets of concepts, values, symbols, and shared meaning specific to the members of that group distinctive enough to distinguish it from others within the same culture or society.
Structural mobility : sators promises of future rewards, such as salvation or eternity in heaven.
Subaltern :  ordered series of questions intended to elicit information from respondents.
Subculture : thnicity a nationality, not in the sense of carrying the rights and duties of citizenship but identifying with a past or future nationality. For later generations of white ethnics, something not constraining but easily expressed, with no risks of stigma and all the pleasures of feeling like an individual.
Supernatural compensators :  micro-level theory in which shared meanings, orientations, and assumptions form the basic motivations behind people’s actions.
Survey : ism the methods of labor management introduced by Frederick Winslow Taylor to streamline the processes of mass production in which each worker repeatedly performs one specific task.
Symbolic ethnicity : e member of a triad who benefits from conflict between the other two members of the group.
Symbolic interactionism :  god or gods, as in Christianity, Islam, and Hinduism.
Taylorism : onnection between two people in a relationship that varies in strength from one relationship to the next; a story that explains our relationship with another member of our network.
Tertius gaudens : on an institution in which one is totally immersed and that controls all the basics of day-to-day life; no barriers exist between the usual spheres of daily life, and all activity occurs in the same place and under the same single authority.
Theism : ng a way of dividing students into different classes by ability or future plans.
Tie : ditional authority authority that rests on appeals to the past or traditions.
Total institution : three.
Tracking : ss the notion, building on the culture of poverty argument, that the poor not only are different from mainstream society in their inability to take advantage of what society has to offer, but also are increasingly deviant and even dangerous to the rest of us.
Traditional authority :  of workers designed to facilitate collective bargaining with an employer.
Triad :  busting a company’s assault on its workers’ union with the hope of dissolving it.
Underclass : s a term for the economic elite.
Union : ity the extent to which an instrument measures what it is intended to measure.
Union busting : beliefs.
Upper class : erman for “understanding.” The concept of Verstehen comes from Max Weber and is the basis of interpretive sociology in which researchers imagine themselves experiencing the life positions of the social actors they want to understand rather than treating those people as objects to be examined.
Validity :  family’s or individual’s net worth (that is, total assets minus total debts).
Values : e state a system in which the state is responsible for the well-being of its citizens.
Verstehen : lar crime offense committed by a professional (or professionals) against a corporation, agency, or other institution.
