absolute poverty : A measure of the minimum requirements needed for people to have basic standards of food, clothing, health, and shelter. Any individual or family falling below this fixed amount is defined as living in poverty. The official U.S. government definition of poverty is an absolute measure based on an estimate of minimum living standards first established in the 1960s and adjusted for inflation thereafter.
access : The ability or right to approach, enter, exit, communicate with, or make use of research sites and materials.
achievement gap : The gap in educational attainment between any two social groups (men and women, whites and non-whites, upper and lower class, etc.).
acid rain : Rain containing acid that is formed when the gaseous air pollutants nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide react with water molecules in the atmosphere.
advance directive : Written instructions (such as a living will) that a person prepares in the event that he or she is no longer able to make decisions at the end of life.
affirmative action : Government policies regarding employment and education that seek to increase the representation of minorities and women in fields from which they have historically been excluded. Affirmative action is undertaken in an effort to counter the historical effects of discrimination and exclusion.
Affordable Care Act : Also known as Obamacare, federal legislation that requires everyone to obtain health insurance, subsidizes cost for low and moderate income families, allows children up to age 26 to stay on their parents’ health insurance, requires insurance companies to offer their policies to everyone (i.e., no limitations on pre-existing conditions), and prevents insurers from cancelling policies before they expire.
age pyramid : A diagram that plots the age distribution of a population, with the numbers at the youngest ages at the bottom of the graph and the numbers at the oldest ages at the top, and with males and females on the left- and right-hand sides, respectively.
agenda setting : The ability to decide which of the many possible topics for discussion, debate, and possible action that exist in the world will actually be considered. Agenda setting can take place in any institutional setting where decision-making occurs.
agnostic : A person who believes that the existence of God or other supernatural beings is unknowable and therefore claims to neither believe or not believe in any faith.
allocation theory : A theory regarding the impacts of education that focuses on how education channels people into positions or institutions that offer different opportunities for continuing to think, learn, and earn.
American Medical Association : The predominant association of physicians, founded in 1847, that has represented the interests and concerns of doctors. For most of its history, it has vigorously opposed the establishment of a national health care system such as those found in most other countries.
analytical sociology : An approach to social theory and research that centers on “middle-range” questions and seeks to uncover the processes, or mechanisms, through which individuals are influenced by social forces.
animism : The belief that a supernatural power organizes all plants, inanimate objects, and natural phenomena and that the universe itself along with all of these objects has a soul or spiritual essence.
anthropocentrism : The belief that humans are separate from and superior to the natural world.
assembly line : A type of factory in which each worker performs one or a handful of small, discrete tasks, with a conveyer belt moving pieces to each workstation. A finished product results from the input of many workers across an entire factory.
assimilation : The process by which immigrants come to be incorporated into their new society by taking on the cultural tastes and practices of the new society.
association : The existence of a relationship between two variables, where a change in one variable is related to a change in another variable.
asylum status : A form of protection available to immigrants seeking admission to another country because of political violence or repression in their home country. Typically, applicants seeking asylum status must demonstrate that their life would be in danger if they were forced to return to their home country.
atheist : A term used to describe anyone who actively rejects the possibility of a god or any other supernatural being.
authority : The ability to compel others to do things without needing to resort to threats. For Max Weber, authority requires legitimacy; that is, individuals grant authority to those they believe have a legitimate right to rule.
autonomy : In work, the power to decide what and how one performs one’s daily tasks, free of close supervision.
baby boom : The post–World War II period in the United States from approximately 1946 through 1964. During this period, fertility was high. The birth cohorts born during the baby boom years produced a generation of Americans that was the largest in U.S. history.
biographical availability : An individual’s freedom to participate in a movement or protest due to a (relative) lack of constraining obligations created by work, school, family, or community.
birth cohort : A group of individuals in a population born within a given time period. Thus the 1995–1999 birth cohort refers to those born between 1995 and 1999.
bourgeoisie : The group in a capitalist economy who own businesses and employ people to work for them. This term is used in the Marxist tradition to refer to the most powerful class in a capitalist society.
Bracero Program : A set of agreements between the United States and Mexico from 1942 to 1964 to import temporary workers from Mexico.
brain drain : The departure of a significant number of the most educated and skilled citizens, who go to live and work in other countries.
bureaucracy : A type of organization that has rules and responsibilities for each position (or job) spelled out, in which selection into those positions occurs on the basis of merit (not typically by election or inheritance). Many bureaucracies are also responsible for setting out policies and procedures that are to be adhered to by others.
cap-and-trade program : A system in which a limit is placed on the total amount of carbon emissions that are allowable (the cap) and in which businesses buy and sell permits that entitle them to a designated amount of emissions (the trade).
capital : A resource that can be used to make investments. Economic capital refers to the possession of financial assets that can be invested in a business. Other types of capital have also been suggested, for example human capital (the skills, education, or knowledge an individual possesses, which can be used to earn higher income) and cultural capital (the cultural knowledge possessed by an individual which impacts an individual’s capacity to speak and interact with others in a sophisticated way).
capital controls : Government policies that limit the movement of capital (i.e., funds available for investment) into or out of a country.
capitalism : An economic system organized around private property and market exchange. In a capitalist economy, goods that are produced for consumption are distributed via exchange on the market.
capitalist economy : An economic system in which goods and services are exchanged through markets, in which prices are established by what buyers are willing to pay, and in which property is privately owned. Under capitalism, markets extend to the hiring of workers at wages determined by negotiations between individuals (or unions) and employers. The role of government in regulating a capitalist economy varies widely, producing different types of capitalist economies around the world today.
capitalist state : The governing institutions and legal system in a capitalist society.
capitalist world system : A concept invented by Immanuel Wallerstein to describe the ways in which capitalist economies are linked in a global system, in which rich, developed countries are able to exploit undeveloped countries through a global division of labor in which poor countries provide raw materials and lower-skill labor.
care work : All types of caring for other people, typically in one’s own family, including childcare, elder care, or taking care of a disabled or sick adult.
caste society : A society in which a person’s social position is determined by the family he or she is born into.
causal inference : A statement about cause and effect that claims that a change in one variable is the cause of a change in another variable.
causality : When change in one variable is a direct cause of change in another variable. For example, long-term smoking is established as a cause of increased risk of lung cancer.
census : A count of the members of a current population.
central planning : An economy in which governments plan the amount of goods to be produced and their price for consumers. Central planning was commonly practiced in communist countries in the twentieth century, such as the Soviet Union, China, and countries in Eastern Europe.
charisma : Derived from a Greek word meaning “gift of grace,” Weber introduced the idea of charisma into the sociological study of social change to refer to unique individuals who claim special powers or gifts that their followers believe to be true.
chronic disease (or chronic health condition) : A health condition that is long lasting, including heart disease, cancer, arthritis, diabetes, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
chronic disease prevalence : The total number of cases of a particular disease in a population, or the proportion of disease cases compared to the population as a whole.
civil inattention : The act of ignoring other people to an appropriate degree even while noticing that other people are present.
civil religion : The sacred beliefs, practices, and symbols associated with a particular nation-state or community, which may or may not contain elements of a traditional organized religion.
class : The sociological concept that refers to a group of people who share a similar social and economic position in society.
class analysis : The study of society focused on class or changes in the system of class inequality. Emphasis is placed on examining how, when, and where people’s actions and beliefs are influenced by their economic position.
class reproduction : The processes that cause class boundaries and distinctions to be maintained over time.
class struggle : The idea that classes of people who are treated differently by the economic system are inevitably going to be in conflict with one another.
climate change : The variety of changes in weather patterns that warming temperatures are producing.
code of ethics : A set of guidelines that outlines what is considered moral and acceptable behavior in some context (such as within an organization or profession).
coercive isomorphism : Similarities between organizations that arise out of legal or other requirements. Organizations become similar because they have no choice.
cohabitation : The act of an unmarried straight or gay couple living together.
collective identity : One’s belief that one belongs to a certain group (or groups) with distinctive characteristics and interests (for example, women, the working class, or socialists). Not all such identities come easily to people; they may have to be consciously created, which is one of the things that some movements do.
college wage premium : Related to when people with less than a college degree have seen their earnings decline or have increasing trouble finding good jobs.
community : A group of individuals who interact with and often support each other on the basis of a shared aspect of personal identity. Communities of people often live in close proximity, but the term can apply to communities linked in other ways.
comparative–historical research : A method of research that examines differences across countries or in different historical periods to try to understand what factors cause some specific change to occur.
concentration of poverty : When a geographically bounded area experiences extremely high rates of economic disadvantage leading to higher rates of social problems.
conflict theory : A type of social theory that emerged out of dissatisfaction with structural functionalism and held that all societies are characterized by conflicts that arise from the uneven distribution of power and wealth between groups.
congregation : A specific religious body that meets regularly.
conjugal family : A family consisting of a relatively autonomous married couple (and their children) able to seek its fortune outside the parental household.
conservationist : One who argues that the point of environmental protection ought to be to responsibly manage natural resources so that they are available for commercial use by future generations.
constructivism : The view that social categories such as race or gender are social creations, not biological facts.
consumption : The act of purchasing and using goods and services.
conurb : A geographically continuous urban area that stretches across city political boundaries.
correlation : The existence of a relationship between two variables. A correlation exists when a change in one variable is related to a change in another variable. It does not necessarily imply, however, that the change in one variable is the cause of the change in the other. Correlation can be contrasted with causality.
counterculture : A group whose ideas, attitudes, and behaviors are in direct conflict with mainstream culture.
counterpublic : Alternative public organizations created by disadvantaged social groups.
counterterrorism : Measures undertaken to fight or combat terrorist organizations, including military strikes and surveillance of suspected terrorist groups.
credentialism : A requirement that one must obtain certain specific degrees or certificates before he or she can be considered for a particular job.
criminal justice system : The entire body of laws and institutions that regulate and punish criminal activity. This includes written laws, courts, and other organizations where guilt or innocence is determined, as well as the places (such as jails and prisons, but also probation and parole offices) where those who have been convicted of a criminal offense are supervised.
cross-national comparison : Research that focuses on explaining the differences between countries, such as understanding why some outcome is observed in one country and not another.
cross-sectional : Research based on data that is collected at one point in time.
cultural capital : The type and level of education and cultural knowledge possessed by an individual. Having a high level of cultural capital signifies one’s high status in the eyes of others.
cultural omnivore : A cultural elite that demonstrates high status through a broad range of cultural consumption and knowledge, including low-status culture.
cultural relativism : The idea that cultural meanings and practices must be evaluated in their own social contexts.
cultural universal : A cultural trait common to all humans and societies.
culture : Systems of belief and knowledge shared by members of a group or society that shape individual and group behavior and attitudes. A society’s culture includes its language, customs, symbols, rituals, and other forms of meaning that are widely shared.
culture industry : The production for profit of popular music, movies, books, television, social media, and other types of mass-culture products by capitalist enterprises.
culture wars : Disagreements about the proper role of family and religious values in society.
curriculum : The structure of coursework and content of a sequence of courses making up a program of study in a school or school system.
data analysis : The scientific process by which researchers interpret the data they have collected.
data coding : The organization of data based on key concepts and categories.
data display : A visual projection of patterns in data, for example as tables or figures.
deglobalization : Periods of history when economic trade and investment between countries declines.
deindustrialization : A steady decline in industrial or manufacturing jobs.
deism : Belief in the existence of a supernatural or supreme being, but rejection of the view that this supreme being actively intervenes in human affairs.
democracy : A concept with multiple meanings, all of which concern the ability of ordinary people to exert direct control over their leaders. As form of governance in the modern world, democracy can be said to exist where leaders are chosen in free elections where anyone can run and the news media are freely allowed to discuss the issues and candidates. Broader conceptions of democracy incorporate a more direct role for citizen participation where everyone has the right to participate and equal resources to do so.
demographer : One who studies population issues, particularly in relation to fertility, mortality, and migration, and how these processes vary among individuals in a population.
demography : The study of population size, particularly in relation to fertility rates (the ratio of live births in a population), mortality (the ratio of deaths and the life expectancy of individuals), and migration across borders.
denomination : An organized branch of a larger religious tradition.
dependent variable : A variable that fluctuates in relation to other (“independent”) variables. In research, the dependent variable is the object of explanation, or what the researcher is trying to explain.
deportation : The act of sending immigrants back to their country of origin.
deskilling : The process of breaking down the tasks involved in the production of goods or services into parts that can be done by someone without specialized training.
determinist : One who believes that a society’s environment, or the technology it has developed to exploit its environment, determines everything else—from its social structure to individuals’ thoughts.
deterrence : Policies or laws that are designed to discourage an individual or group from engaging in some kind of behavior.
deviant : An individual whose actions or attitudes fall outside the generally accepted norms of a given group or society. What is “deviant” behavior is subject to change, depending on which group(s) have the power to define what is “normal.”
diaspora : A group of people dispersed from their original homeland and settled in other areas for long periods of time who nonetheless retain cultural practices, memories, and ties to that space.
digital divide : The social, economic, and cultural gap between those with effective access to information technology and those without such access.
discrimination : Any behavior, practice, or policy that harms, excludes, or disadvantages individuals on the basis of their group membership. Discrimination is often used by dominant groups to control opportunities and reduce the challenges from subordinate groups.
division of labor : The specialization of individuals in any organization or group, or in society as a whole, particularly in relation to work. There is thus a division of labor in all of society (with different people working in different occupations), a division of labor in individual organizations (where different people perform different tasks) and a division of labor in individual families and communities.
doctrine : The official beliefs and rules of a particular religion or social and political group. Most commonly used to refer to more rigid belief systems.
double standard of sexuality : Judging women more harshly than men for having sex outside of marriage or outside of relationships.
ecology : The branch of science that studies the relationship between organisms and their environment.
economic restructuring : Changes in the way the economy, firms, and employment relations are organized.
edge city : A concentrated area of business, shopping, and entertainment just outside of the historical urban centers of commerce. Edge cities differ from classic suburbs in having a considerable amount of land devoted to economic activities, not just residences.
educational homogamy : The practice of people marrying individuals with educational levels similar to their own.
egalitarian : A society, organization, or group characterized by having little or very low levels of inequality.
egalitarian relationship : A relationship where all members of the relationship share more or less equally in performing required tasks. In the case of intimate relationships, this includes sharing household chores, including child or elder care.
emigration : The act of leaving one’s country of birth to move to a new country.
emigration and immigration policies : Government policies regulating the right of people to move into or out of a country.
empirical generalizability : The application of conclusions from findings about one group or setting to the larger population. An empirical research result is generalizable when the same result can be found in another context.
entrepreneur : One who invests money in a business.
enumerate : Systematically count (as in counting population).
environmental justice : The achievement of equal protection from environmental hazards for all people, regardless of race, class, or geography; environmental justice also means giving community members a voice in shaping decisions that affect their environment and their health.
environmental racism : A concept that describes how poor people of color disproportionately bear the burden of environmental hazards.
environmental sociology : The study of how society simultaneously shapes and is shaped by the physical environment.
epidemiological transition : The transition of a population from health conditions primarily involving infectious disease to health conditions primarily involving chronic disease.
epidemiology : The study of health-related events in populations, their characteristics, their causes, and their consequences.
essentialism : The view that members of a group share a fundamental, inherited, innate, and fixed quality or characteristic. This outlook presumes that races are natural groupings whose boundaries are determined by deep-seated and unchangeable traits that are found within each individual.
ethnic enclave : A place where people of a particular ethnicity live in high concentration.
ethnicity : A system for classifying people who are believed to share common descent, based on perceived cultural similarities.
ethnocentrism : The inability to understand, accept, or reference patterns of behavior or belief different from one’s own.
ethnographer : A sociologist who enters the everyday lives of those he or she studies in hopes of understanding how they navigate and give meaning to their worlds.
ethnography : A qualitative research method for studying the way of life of a group of people by close observation of them over a relatively long period of time.
ethnomethodology : A line of sociological inquiry (introduced by Harold Garfinkel) that studies the ways (tools and methods) members of a particular group construct social order and make sense of their everyday lives.
evangelical : Someone who believes in salvation through personal conversion (or being “born again”). Evangelicals are also known for their emphasis on bringing their beliefs to others. The term is mostly associated with Christianity, although it can apply to someone of other faiths as well.
export : Goods or services that are sold outside the country in which they are produced.
extended case method : A method of conducting ethnography that emphasizes the contribution of research to social theory. An ethnographer using the extended case method starts from a theoretical problem or puzzle.
factors of production : The inputs—such as land, labor, capital, and technology—that go into the production of any good or service.
fad : Any kind of behavior that spreads (often rapidly) among a specific population and is repeated enthusiastically for some period of time before disappearing (often rapidly).
family values : A term generally associated with views and ideas about the family that highlight the virtues of heterosexual marriage and childrearing in a traditional nuclear family with defined gender roles. Family values can also be applied to other kinds of nontraditional unions.
fee for service : A system of payment to doctors in which they are paid based on the number of exams and procedures they perform, rather than receiving a salary.
feminist movement : A social movement whose members advocate equality between men and women in rights and opportunities.
feminist social theory : Social theories which place gender relations and male domination at the center of their conceptualization of societies.
fertility : The process by which members of a population produce live births.
feudalism : A social order in which those who own land (landlords) are entitled to receive the products of the laborers (serfs) who are legally obligated to work for the landowner.
first demographic transition : The transition by a country or region from a pretransition period of high fertility and high mortality, to a mid-transition period of declining mortality followed by declining fertility, to a posttransition period in which both mortality and fertility are low.
first immigration era : The period before 1875, in which immigration into the United States was essentially unregulated by the U.S. government.
Flexner Report : A report on medical education issued in 1910 under the auspices of the Carnegie Foundation that concluded most existing medical schools failed to train their students in modern science and laboratory practices. Led to a huge reorganization of medical school education, with nearly half of existing schools closing or merging in response to the report.
forces of production : One part of the modes of production; the technological and productive capacity of any society at a given point in time.
foreign direct investment (FDI) : A type of investment by a company in one country to produce goods or services in another. This could involve the purchase of an existing business in the second country or by building factories and/or offices in the second country and hiring workers.
foreign investment : Investment of capital from one country into another.
foreign-born citizen : An immigrant who has obtained citizenship in his or her new country.
fossil fuel : An energy source, such as coal, oil, or natural gas, that is made of fossils that decomposed over millions of years under high pressure.
fourth immigration era : In the period since 1965 in the United States, allowable immigration has been subject to a series of restrictions on immigration from both the Eastern and Western Hemispheres but without specific national origins quotas.
framing : The specific ways in which ideas and beliefs are presented to other people. Politicians, political activists, and social movements all engage in framing efforts when they try to persuade others that their way of thinking is correct. Scholars of social movements have also focused on how activists try to frame or present their cause or ideas for change so that they make sense to or resonate with the beliefs of potential recruits and supporters.
free space : Place where people gather that do not have any government or corporate surveillance, where oppositional ideas and tactics can develop and spread.
fundamental social cause : A theory stating that individuals of higher socioeconomic status have access to knowledge, money, power, and social connections that are deployed throughout the life course to avoid disease and death. These resources can be deployed in a range of situations. As a result, this theory predicts that no matter what the causes of bad health, socioeconomic inequalities will inevitably emerge.
gender : The ways that social forces create differences between men’s and women’s behavior, preferences, treatment, and opportunities, and the characteristics of men and women that reflect these forces.
General Social Survey : A biennial survey of American society since 1972 covering a wide range of social, demographic, and attitudinal questions.
generalization : Forming conclusions about broader society from research on a subgroup or sample of the broader society.
generalized other : The social control exercised by commonsense understandings of what is appropriate given a specific time and place.
Geneva Conventions : A set of international agreements between countries about how prisoners of war are to be treated.
genocide : The deliberate and systematic killing of a category of people.
gentrification : The process that occurs when neighborhoods undergo a process of change where new investment, new people, and new establishments move into and alter the character of the neighborhood.
ghetto : A poor, isolated neighborhood, often formed as the result of residential segregation in which members of a poor or low-status racial, ethnic, or religious group are compelled to live in the same place.
glass ceiling : A term used to describe the limitations on the advancement of women in corporations, suggesting that even as firms begin to hire large numbers of women they are failing to promote them into positions of power and authority.
global city : A city that contains a disproportionate amount of global business activity, particularly when connected by international finance, trade, culture, and communication to other cities around the world. Because it acts as a node at the center of global economic activity, global cities are places in which trade and investment are facilitated.
global neighborhood : A diverse neighborhood made up of people from several different national and ethnic groups.
global value chain : The full range of activities that businesses and workers provide at each stage of the production of a good or service that add to its value. While a value chain can be entirely within a single company, or contained with one country, increasingly global value chains (with production inputs from more than one country) are being found.
global warming : Describes the rising of Earth’s average temperature.
globalization : The growing permeability of national borders and the increase in flows of goods, services, and people across national borders.
Great Migration : The move of African Americans from the rural South to the industrial North in the first half of the twentieth century.
green card : A term used to describe a visa status for an immigrant to the United States that allows its holder to live in the United States permanently but does not make that immigrant a citizen.
greenhouse effect : The result of high levels of CO2 in the atmosphere allowing the sun’s heat to pass through to the Earth’s surface while stopping it from spreading back into space.
gross domestic product (GDP) : The total value of all goods and services, plus investment and government expenditures, that a country produces.
group style : The set of norms and practices that distinguishes one group from another.
growth machine : A coalition of business interests and city boosters who work together with local governments to attract residents and economic investment to a particular area.
guerilla warfare : A type of warfare in which an outmanned army hides from its larger opponent and engages in attacks only in situations where it thinks it can gain an advantage.
habitus : A concept introduced by sociologist Pierre Bourdieu to refer to the diverse ways in which individuals develop intuitive understandings and engrained habits reflecting their class background and upbringing.
Hawthorne studies : An influential series of studies at the Hawthorne plant of the Western Electric company in the 1920s. Two major findings emerged from these studies: (1) the experiment effect, which is any change interpreted by workers as management’s attempt to improve conditions, especially those that provide mental stimulation, improve workers, productivity; and (2) the social group effect, in which workers moved to separate spaces as a group develop bonds that increase their productivity.
health disparity : A difference in health status linked to social, economic, or environmental conditions including socioeconomic status, race and ethnicity, gender, and geographic location.
healthy life expectancy : The average number of healthy years one can expect to live if current patterns of death and illness remain the same.
hegemony : Widely shared beliefs about what is right or wrong that legitimize and empower a society’s elites.
heteronormativity : A type of prejudice that claims that being heterosexual is the only normal option for an individuals’ sexual orientation.
heterosexism : Discrimination or bias against persons because they are not heterosexual.
hidden curriculum : The often unstated standards of behavior that teachers and administrators expect from children within the education system. These often unstated expectations may reflect the middle-class biases and norms of school professionals.
homelessness : An extreme form of poverty defined by lack of permanent shelter to live in.
homeopathy : A medical sect, originally from Germany, that emphasized the use of small amounts of a drug known to cause a health condition in large doses to treat that very same health condition when it manifests itself in an individual.
homophobia : Discrimination or bias against homosexual persons that is based in fear.
hookup : Sexual behavior (not always intercourse) that occurs in a situation that was not a prearranged date and between individuals who may or may not be interested in an exclusive romantic relationship.
hospice care : The treatment of people with incurable diseases in the final stage of life. The goal of hospice care is to attempt to help patients live as pain-free as possible in their final days.
human capital : The stock of experience, knowledge, skills, and habits which an individual has that they can use to do productive labor.
hypothesis : A prediction researchers make that they will test in their research.
identity : The social characteristics and group affiliations an individual has.
ideology : A set of ideas that constitutes one’s goals, expectations, and actions.
illegal immigration : Undocumented immigration.
immigration : A term that describes the movement of people across borders.
immobility : A situation in which individuals are unable to move from one economic or social class into another. Usually immobility means that people remain in the same social and economic situation that they are born into (in other words, in the same class or income group as their parents).
implicit prejudice or bias : Prejudice based on stereotypes that can be activated without an individual’s being consciously aware of holding them.
import : A good or service purchased in one country but manufactured in another.
import-substituting industrialization (ISI) : Government policies that attempt to replace imported goods with similar goods produced by domestic companies. Examples of such policies include putting very high taxes on certain imported goods or barring them altogether. ISI was a strategy used by many poor and moderate-income developing countries in the twentieth century in an attempt to foster domestic economic growth.
in-depth interview : A method of collecting data based on asking a person a set of questions and having a conversation with him or her focused on gathering information related to the research.
incarceration : The holding of an individual in a jail or prison.
income : The receipt of money or goods over a particular accounting period (such as hourly, weekly, monthly, or yearly). Income may include wages from a job, benefits from a pension or government program, or income from investments.
independent variable : A factor that might help to explain some outcome of interest. An example might be the impact of educational level—in this case, the independent variable—on one’s income as an adult.
individual discrimination : Action carried out by an individual or small group that harms, excludes, or disadvantages members of a certain group.
Industrial Revolution : The period in which mass production in factories began to develop and fostered rapid economic growth. The timing of the Industrial Revolution varied from country to country but is generally thought to have begun in the late eighteenth century and evolved throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
industrialization : A process of economic change characterized by the decline of farming and the growth of factories and large-scale goods production.
inequality : The unequal distribution of valued goods and opportunities in society.
inequality of opportunity : The ways in which inequality shapes the opportunities for children and young adults to maximize their potential.
infant mortality rate : A measure of infant mortality, defined as the number of deaths per 1,000 live births in a given calendar year, with the number of deaths referring to babies who die during their first 12 months of life.
infectious disease : A disease caused by the entrance, presence, or growth of a microorganism or other foreign agent inside the body.
information asymmetry : A situation that occurs when one party to a transaction is unable to obtain the information necessary to evaluate the other side’s offer in any transaction. In the case of medicine, patients usually have no way of learning in advance how much different procedures might cost or which doctor offers the best service at a reasonable cost.
informed consent : The voluntary participation of someone in a research project or medical treatment based on the participant/patient having a full understanding of possible risks and benefits involved.
institution : 
institutional (or structural) discrimination : Occurs when the actions or policies of organizations or social institutions exclude, disadvantage, or harm members of particular groups. Such discrimination need not be intentional, and in practice it is often hard to discern whether or not discriminatory intentions lay behind a particular policy or practice.
institutional review board (IRB) : Required at all universities that receive federal funds for research, these boards review researchers’ proposals before any work can begin in order to assess the potential harm of the research for participants being studied.
institutionalization : The process by which a social practice or organization begins to become an institution; the introduction of formal roles and rules in an organized form.
interdisciplinary research : A method of research that integrates ideas, theories, and data from different academic fields.
interest group : An organization established to promote the interests of a group or corporation, especially in Congress or at the level of state governments.
intermarriage : Marriage between people in different social groups.
interpretative sociology : The study of the meanings individuals ascribe to their actions.
intersectionality : Forms of inequality that overlap and potentially reinforce one another. One’s class, race, ethnicity, religion, gender, sexuality, or other characteristics may create multiple forms of disadvantage that inequality researchers should consider.
intersex individual : A person who is born with a body that has some biological characteristics typically found in only male bodies, as well as other biological characteristics typically found in female bodies (for example, a penis and ovaries).
irreligion : The absence of religion.
jail : A place of detention where individuals are held either before trial or serve relatively minor sentences. Prisons generally hold offenders convicted of more serious crimes.
journalism : The production and dissemination of information about contemporary affairs of general importance.
kin : Other people that individuals have important social relationships with. These important others often include immediate (and sometimes extended) family members but also can include close friends and even other acquaintances who play an important (and sometimes supportive) role in one’s life.
kinship system : The social links and boundaries, defined by biology and social custom, that establish who is related to whom.
labeling theory : A theory of deviance that stresses that many kinds of behaviors are deviant solely because they are labeled as such.
labor market : The process through which employers identify and hire individuals to work under specified terms of employment.
labor process : The organization of work, in terms of the relationship between workers and employers, the way specific work tasks are structured and performed, and the technologies and organizational environments in which the work is performed.
language : Refers to any comprehensive system of words or symbols representing concepts, and it does not necessarily need to be spoken, as the hundreds of.
lean production : A term used to describe the efforts of economic organizations in recent years to achieve more efficiency by constantly scrutinizing and reducing costs in every possible way.
legal permanent resident (LPR) : One who is allowed to live permanently in a country even though he or she is not a citizen. In the United States, such a person would hold a green card.
legal temporary resident : A person allowed to live in a country for a specified period of time.
legitimacy : The acceptance of the authority of a ruler and/or system of government. Legitimacy exists when virtually all members of society accept the right of their rulers to govern their society.
liberation theology : A strain of theology first associated with Latin American Catholicism that emphasizes god’s concern for the poor and downtrodden and the rightness of social justice causes.
life chances : An individual’s long-term possibilities and potential, including future income and opportunities, given his or her current attributes such as level of education, social networks, and possession of marketable skills or assets. Members of the same class are generally said to have similar life chances.
life course : The transitions individuals make as they age through their lives. A typical life course includes childhood, adolescence, the transition to adulthood and first job, perhaps becoming a parent, retiring, and death. The study of the life course by sociologists centers on the key transitions, or turning points, in individual lives and the larger social patterns they represent.
life expectancy (at age x) : The average number of additional years (past age x) that the average person in a population can expect to live.
life-course perspective : A model that highlights the effects that social contexts a person inhabits throughout life have on his or her health.
longitudinal research : Research based on data collected over a long period of time.
looking-glass self : A term coined by sociologist Charles Horton Cooley to emphasize the extent to which our own self-understandings are dependent on how others view us.
loose coupling : An organizational environment in which those at the top do not have control over the activities and decisions underneath them. This often arises in complex organizations with multiple units.
lynching : The killing of someone by a group, without a trial or due process, for some specified behavior.
mainstream culture : The most widely shared systems of meaning in a society. Mainstream culture includes the most widely consumed cultural products (music, literature, films), foods, and ways of speaking and widely shared ideas about normal or appropriate behavior.
malpractice : In medicine, an improper or negligent type of treatment of patient that causes harm to the patient.
market : Any setting in which buyers and sellers engage in exchange.
mass communication : Communication within society as a whole through the mass media (television, Internet, newspapers, radio), as opposed to between individuals.
mass incarceration : A term used to describe a situation in which a very high proportion of people are held in prisons. It has been used to describe developments in the American criminal justice system over the past 30 years.
mean : A statistical term that refers to the average value of a set of data. Add all values and then divide the total by the number of values used.
mechanical solidarity : According to Emile Durkheim, mechanical solidarity refers to the factors that hold primitive societies together, mostly through family and kinship ties and a collective consciousness shared by all members of the community.
mechanism : The specific factor or factors that cause something to happen or produce some outcome.
median : A statistical term that refers to the value that lies at the middle (or midpoint) of all the data, with an equal number of cases with either higher or lower values.
Medicaid : A federally funded, state-administered program that provides health insurance to poor families and poor children,
medical board : Each state has established a board to review physicians and hospitals. These boards are usually made up of people from the medical field: physicians, hospital administrators, nurses, public health officials, academics, and representatives from various medical companies. Members of the public are now usually included as well.
medicalization : The process by which some human condition comes to be defined as a medical condition, one that can be treated using medicine.
Medicare : A federal government program in the United States that provides health insurance to all individuals over 65 years of age.
megachurch : Individual (and often independent) Protestant churches which average over 2,000 people in attendance at weekly services.
megacity : A city with a population over 10 million.
megaregion : A geographically continuous urban area containing at least two very large cities and their surrounding towns, which are connected through economic and transportation infrastructure.
metropolitan region : A continuously populated region with several jurisdictions (a large central city surrounded by several smaller towns) that are all physically connected to one another.
middle class : A group of people who occupy the middle positions in terms of income and status in an economic system.
middle-range theory : A theory that makes specific, researchable propositions about particular aspects of society. Middle-range theories can be contrasted with broader or grand theories of society as a whole.
migrant energy : The special skills and determination brought to a country by migrants, who may be especially motivated to succeed.
migrant remittance : The process by which a migrant sends money to family or friends in his or her home country.
migration : The process by which individuals move from one location, region, country, or city to another.
mimetic isomorphism : The tendency of similar organizations to adopt the same kinds of rules and procedures in the belief that what works for one organization should work for others.
minimum wage : Established by law, minimum wage is the lowest hourly wage a worker can be paid.
mixed-method research : Research that uses evidence that is both qualitative and quantitative.
mode of production : In Marxist theory, a mode of production is a concept for characterizing the dominant economic system in a society. A mode of production has two parts, the forces of production and the social relations of production.
moral behavior : Behavior that is guided by a belief about what is right and proper to do.
moral shock : An unexpected event that surprises, distresses, and outrages people, often to the point of motivating them to join or even start a movement to eliminate the source of their outrage.
mortality : The process by which individuals in a population gradually die.
mover : An individual who leaves a place to live in another.
multiculturalism : Beliefs or policies promoting the equal accommodation of different ethnic or cultural groups within a society. It is sometimes also used to refer to the benefits of dialogue and interaction between different groups.
national culture : The set of shared cultural practices and beliefs of people living within a nation-state.
nationalism : A set of beliefs about the virtues of one’s country. In the sociology of race and ethnicity, nationalism includes the assumption that people are inherently members of a specific nation, and that their identities are in large part defined by their national membership.
natural selection : In evolutionary biology, a theory of how species evolve that emphasizes the process through which biological traits become more or less common depending on whether they enhance the survival of the species.
naturalization : The process of becoming a citizen in a new country.
neo-Marxism : An updated form of Marxism, neo-Marxism contends that the capitalist state could, and indeed often has, forced powerful economic classes to make “concessions” to the working class (thereby improving the living standards of all citizens).
net financial assets (NFA) : The total value of savings, investments, and other convertible assets a person has, minus any debts, and excluding one’s primary home (if it is owned).
network analysis : A research technique that focuses on identifying the connections among individuals, groups, or organizations.
networked public : An online public sphere.
new religious movement : A religious group that emerges independently of existing religious traditions or makes significant revisions and additions to them.
niche : A unique place or opportunity that can be profitably filled by someone or some group. Niches arise in a variety of ways, especially when existing organizations or government agencies fail to meet some underlying social need.
No Child Left Behind : Legislation passed in 2001 which sought reduce the achievement gap between low-income and minority children and higher-income white children.
norm : A basic rule of society that helps us know what is and is not appropriate to do in a situation. Norms evolve over time as social attitudes and expectations change, although those changes are typically very slow.
normalize : To make or declare some action as normal or appropriate.
normative isomorphism : The process of organizations becoming similar because of a widespread belief among their members and the members of similar organizations that they should adopt certain rules or procedures.
nuclear family : A term used to describe a family consisting of a husband and wife and their children.
nurse practitioner (NP) : Nurses with advanced degrees and clinical training to enable independent patient diagnoses and treatment.
occupation : A job that has been formally established and has some requirements (often formalized) for training or knowledge to perform it.
occupational sex segregation : When women and men are distributed differently across occupations, such that some jobs are filled mostly by men and others mostly by women.
one-drop rule : Enshrined in many state laws in the United States around the turn of the nineteenth century, this method of racial classification defined any individual with any African ancestry as black. From this viewpoint someone with one black great-grandparent and seven white great-grandparents is considered black because their “drop of black blood” means they have more in common with blacks than with whites.
operationalize : When researchers define the methods and techniques to be used to assess and define the concepts that are being investigated.
organic solidarity : According to Emile Durkheim, as societies become more advanced, they are held together through the mutual dependence and interdependence individuals have with one another.
organization : A social group or social network that is unified by a common institutional structure, such as a government agency, a school, a business firm, the military, a religion, and many others.
organizational isomorphism : The process by which similar organizations adopt similar rules and procedures.
outsourcing : Common in globalization, outsourcing refers to the contracting of parts of the production process to another party, possibly located abroad. A common example in the United States is of credit-card companies hiring people in India to handle customer service calls.
paganism : Religions that generally envision a set of gods and attendants who rule the world.
palliative care : All types of healthcare designed to reduce pain and suffering by helping patients get better. It is often contrasted with hospice care, where there is no hope of curing or improving a patient.
path dependency : The process by which the historical legacies and outcomes of the past impact actors and organizations in the present, making some choices or outcomes appear logical and others illogical.
patient-centered care : Involving the patient in developing a program of care for a medical condition; the patient should be part of the conversation about how to treat the condition.
patriarchy : A gender system in which men have substantially more power than women in politics, the economy, and the family.
patrilocal : A family relationship in which a married couple resides with the husband’s parents.
peasant : A person who works in agriculture but does not own the land he or she farms.
physically and mentally unhealthy days : The number of days people in a given population rated their physical or mental health as “not good.”
pluralism (in religion) : The coexistence of individuals and religious groups with significantly different beliefs and cultures in the same society.
political action committee (PAC) : A term used in U.S. politics to describe an organization set up to collect political donations from individuals, corporations, or unions to influence political and electoral outcomes.
political-process perspective : A theoretical perspective that emphasizes that movements are concerned with politics, not individual psychological states, and are a rational form of politics (“politics by other means”) and a normal response, under certain circumstances, to routine institutional political processes. Movements emerge and may be successful if those political processes create political opportunities for certain kinds of collective protest.
polygamy : The practice of marriage of one individual to two or more other individuals.
polytheistic : Religions that worship more than one entity or god.
population dynamics : The process by which a population changes in size over time.
population momentum : The tendency of a population that has been changing in size to continue to change in size even if factors such as fertility and mortality have shifted to levels that would, in the long run, imply no change in population size.
poverty line : Established by the government, it is the minimum income necessary to afford basic necessities. Anyone below this threshold is considered to be in poverty.
power : Power has three distinct dimensions in the sociological sense: (1) the power of an individual or group to get another individual or group to do something it wants, which sometimes may involve force; (2) the power to control the agenda of issues that are to be decided; and finally (3) the power to persuade others that their interests are the same as those of a powerholder. Power can be possessed by individuals or groups.
precapitalist economy : All of the different types of economies that existed before the rise of capitalism, including those based on hunting or agriculture.
precariat : A new term that combines precariousness with Karl Marx’s term for the working class (the proletariat) to describe the growing number of workers employed in part-time, insecure jobs with low wages and no control over their hours of work or working conditions.
prejudice : Negative beliefs or attitudes held about entire groups based on subjective, selective, or inaccurate information. They lead to “prejudgment” of the individuals associated with stigmatized groups.
preservationist : One who believes that the environment has intrinsic value and should be maintained in as pristine a state as possible.
price convergence : When the prices of goods sold in different places tends toward the same level, adjusted for currency values. 
principal : In the immigration process, the family member who is applying for the right to live in another country (with his or her family members as secondary applicants) is called the principal.
prison : A place of detention where people convicted of felonies (serious crimes requiring at least one year of detention) are held.
privilege : The ability or right to have special access to opportunities or claims on rewards.
probability sampling : A technique for choosing participants for a research study (i.e., a probability sample) in which each person in the population is assigned a known and likely chance of being selected. Some groups of people can be assigned different probabilities of being selected when the probability sample is stratified based on group membership.
probation : A criminal conviction that does not require a prison or jail sentence. During probation, convicted offenders are subject to regular supervision but are allowed to live in their community.
professionalism : An occupation that succeeds in gaining government licensing over the right to practice (and typically leaders of the occupation or professional association control the licensing process), establishes educational requirements to anyone to become eligible for license, and regulates and disciplines members of the profession when necessary.
progressive tax system : A tax system in which tax rates are higher on richer people than poorer people, with the idea being that it is fair to ask those who can afford to pay more to do so. These systems can be based on a progressive income tax and can also differentially assess taxes on wealth transfers, such as inheritances.
Prohibition : The period from 1920 to 1933 in which the consumption or sale of alcohol was barred by a Constitutional amendment (repealed in 1933).
proletariat : Individuals in capitalist economies who work in exchange for pay. The term is usually reserved for people performing manual jobs and is synonymous with “working class.”
proportional representation (PR) : A system of elections in which seats in a legislature are divided up based on the percentage of the vote received. In many PR systems, there is a minimum threshold, such as 5 percent, for a party to cross before it receives seats.
Protestant ethic : The belief that hard work and thrift are signs of god’s grace.
psychoanalysis : The study of the conscious and unconscious aspects of the mind and their influence on individual behavior.
public health : Public policies that aim to reduce the spread of disease and ill health among entire populations by means such as improved sanitation and garbage handling, maintaining clean water, monitoring airborne diseases, and fighting the outbreak of viruses.
public opinion : The views of citizens in the aggregate on social and political topics. Public opinion is usually measured through opinion polls and surveys, where modern sampling techniques allow researchers to estimate opinions by asking a smaller representative group of citizens.
public policy : All of the policies adopted or implemented by the government. A distinction between foreign policy and domestic policy is important, with the former including all policies relating to foreign governments and national security issues, while the latter refers to all of the policies and programs that aim to address social problems or issues inside the country.
public sphere : A social space—physical, virtual, or theoretical—where private citizens can come together as a public body to discuss and express opinions about matters of general interest.
pull factor : In the immigration context, when an individual’s motivation to move to another country is based on the perceived attractions of life in the new country.
purchasing cooperatives : A group of individuals or organizations that band together to be able to negotiate better prices. Under the Affordable Care Act, these groups organized at the state level, attempt to negotiate affordable rates for individuals seeking to buy health insurance.
push factor : When an individual decides to leave a country because of something that is making her or him unhappy (such as low pay, lack of jobs, limited opportunities, or political or religious persecution).
qualitative research : Research that relies on nonnumerical data, such as words, observations, or pictures.
quantitative research : Research that relies on statistical analysis of numerical or categorical data.
race : A system for classifying people who are believed to share common descent, based on perceived innate physical similarities.
racism : Prejudice and/or discrimination against individuals who are members or particular racial or ethnic groups, often drawing on negative stereotypes about the group. Institutional racism refers to rules and regulations that organizations adopt that significantly harm members of a racial or ethnic group.
random sampling : A technique for choosing participants for a research study in which each person in the population of interest has an equal chance of being chosen so that the sample mirrors a larger population and reflects its characteristics or dynamics.
random-assignment experiment : A study using a method of assigning participants or groups to receive different treatments that ensures that any posttreatment differences result from the different treatments they received.
rational-choice perspective : A perspective in social and economic theory that emphasizes the centrality of individual decision making based on how individuals think about their well-being and how best to advance it. While there are a variety of different versions of the rational-choice perspective, all emphasize that individual action is the foundation of society and social order.
receiving country : Host or destination countries where migrants go.
redlining : The determination by governments and banks that neighborhoods with high percentages of racial minorities were ineligible for mortgage loans. Redlining has been illegal since the 1970s.
reference group : A set of individuals who share similar preferences or social positions and have influence on an individual or members of a group.
refugee status : A form of protection that may be granted to people who have been persecuted or fear they will be persecuted on account of race, religion, nationality, political opinions, or membership in a particular social group.
rehabilitation : The attempt to reform a convicted offender so that he or she will not commit crimes in the future. Rehabilitation often involves the use of therapies of various kinds, as well as helping an offender develop job and life skills that will help him or her desist from crime in the future.
relative poverty : A term used to define people as poor not by assessing whether their resources are sufficient to obtain basic social necessities but rather by comparing their incomes relative to other people in society.
reliability : The extent to which the same measurement technique in additional studies would end up producing similar results.
religiosity : The importance of religion in an individual’s life.
remittance : Money sent from an individual in one country to an individual (often a family member) in another country.
renewable energy : Sources of energy that are capable of being replaced by natural ecological cycles, such as wind, sunlight, and water.
replacement fertility : A level of fertility in which individuals in a population, on average have a sufficient number of offspring that will imply, over the long run, no change in the size of the population.
replicated : A study that has been repeated to make sure its results are correct.
representative sample : A small group of people, ideally selected at random, who are similar to the entire population.
research memo : An extended version of research notes, usually organized analytically, that allows researchers to work through their findings and the evidence they have to support them.
resource-mobilization approach : A theoretical perspective that emphasizes the importance of resources, like labor and money, for generating and sustaining social movements. The more resources a movement is able to employ or mobilize, the more successful it is likely to be.
respondent : A person participating in a study who can be asked specific questions of interest to the investigator.
retribution : Punishment that aims at making a criminal offender experience as much harm as he or she has caused others.
revolution : A revolution consists, at minimum, of a change of government or political regime brought about, at least in part, by popular protest. Some define revolutions (or “social revolutions”) more narrowly, as entailing not only a change of regime but also a fundamental change in a society’s economic institutions and class structure.
revolutionary movement : A social movement that seeks to overthrow a government or fundamentally change a society’s economic institutions and class structure.
revolutionary situation : A situation that occurs when two or more political institutions or groups claim to be the rightful or legitimate rulers of a certain territory or population. Such a situation is also called “dual power” or “multiple sovereignty.”
riot : A spontaneous, unplanned collective protest, loosely organized at best, involving attacks on property and (sometimes) persons.
role : A position within an institution or organization that comes with specific social expectations for how to behave and be treated. Some roles may be ascribed, that is, assigned to us by birth (man, woman, white, black), and some may be achieved, that is, acquired through our actions (doctor, professor, class clown).
role conflict : When two or more discordant demands are placed on individuals, rendering them unable to fulfill their own or others, expectations.
role model : A specific individual who exhibits significant influence on others and acts as a reference for how to act.
rural : An area not adjacent to an urban area that has low population density.
sacred : Holy; worthy of special reverence.
same-sex marriage : A marriage between two partners of the same sex.
sample : A technique to define what or whom to include in a study.
sanction : Any type of punishment, including both formal punishment (based on laws or written rules) and informal types of punishments.
scientific management : A movement that arose in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries that attempted to improve productivity by ensuring that managers controlled all aspects of the labor process and would utilize the best practices available given existing technology and knowledge.
scientific method : A step-by-step process of conducting research that begins with formulating a research hypothesis, then operationalizing variables, then collecting data, and finally drawing empirical and conceptual generalizations from the data.
second demographic transition : Some scholars have argued that rich countries are now going through a new demographic transition in which fertility rates have fallen below replacement levels, a multitude of living arrangements other than marriage are emerging, and there is an increasing disconnection between marriage and procreation. Declining fertility combined with increased longevity means that populations are getting older. Finally, many societies are becoming multi-ethnic because of increased levels of immigration to stem population decline.
second generation : The children of immigrants.
second immigration era : The period between 1875 and 1920, in which the United States made its first attempts to establish some restrictions on immigration. This era included restrictions on immigrants from China, those who were sick or impoverished, those lacking literacy, and other such restrictions.
second shift : A term created and popularized by Arlie Hochschild to refer to housework, childcare, and elder care disproportionally done by women. The first shift refers to one’s paid job, whereas the second shift refers to the labor needed to keep households going.
secularization : A process of declining influence or marginalization of religion in society.
secularization hypothesis : A theory that as societies modernize and citizens become better educated, religion will inevitably decline.
segmented assimilation : The various pathways by which immigrant groups become part of the larger social fabric; instead of the pattern where the children of immigrants are economically upwardly mobile and their ethnic difference dissipates with future generations, new forms of assimilation include economic instability and continuing traditional ethnic practices.
segregation : The spatial separation of the population based on race or ethnicity.
self : The conscious being, personified in a human body, which is made and reformulated through social interaction.
self-fulfilling prophecy : A term coined by Robert Merton to mean the process by which someone is defined in a particular way and then comes to fulfill the expectations of that definition.
self-selected : When individuals have the opportunity to choose to be in some condition, those making that choice may be different than those who do not make that choice. The “selection effect” reflects the differences between those two groups.
sending country : The country migrants were born in.
serf : Under feudalism, a person who is legally obligated to work for the landowner.
serial relationships : A pattern of having repeated, short-term intimate relationships with other adults.
sex : Whether a person is classified as male or female based on anatomical or chromosomal criteria.
sex differences : Differences that are assumed to exist because of anatomical or chromosomal criteria.
sexual minority : A group whose sexual behavior or attractions are unusual in a given society. Those who are homosexual, bisexual, or transgendered are sexual minorities.
sexual orientation : Whether one’s sexual attractions are to members of the same sex, the other sex, or both.
significant other : A term coined by George Herbert Mead to mean individuals close enough to us to have a strong capacity to motivate our behavior.
slavery : A social system that denies some individuals all basic rights, allowing these individuals to be owned, controlled, and compelled to work for others.
smog : A smoky air pollutant produced when tailpipe or smokestack emissions that linger in the atmosphere chemically react with the sunlight.
social background : A person’s family or the community where he or she lives and where he or she grew up.
social capital : The resources available to a particular individual through his or her connections to others.
social closure : The process by which organized groups seek to establish or maintain privileged access to rewards or opportunities.
social construct : An invented social phenomenon (for example a belief, discourse, or category) that is shaped by the social forces present in the time and place of its creation.
social construction (of race or gender) : The social processes that create and sustain gender and race differences and inequality.
social construction (of the environment) : The process by which people interpret the natural world and make it meaningful.
social context : The social environments, including economic and cultural conditions, that influence people’s lives.
social control : The institutions, norms, and rules through which societies attempt to shape and control individuals. Behavior that violates social rules is typically punished either formally or informally, reflecting the different ways in which social control is administered.
social distance : A concept first introduced by Georg Simmel to describe how close or intimate, or apart, any two individuals or groups are with each other.
social fact : According to Emile Durkheim, those regularities and rules of everyday life that exist independently and outside the control of individuals.
social forces : All of the forms of social structure (hierarchies and institutions) that any individual must operate within. Social forces are related to what Emile Durkheim called “social facts.”
social group : A collection of individuals formed around some kind of social identity or for some specific purpose.
social hierarchy : Any relationship between individuals or groups that is unequal and provides one person or group with more status and power than another.
social interaction : The way people act together, including how they modify and alter their behavior in response to the presence of others. Social interaction is governed by norms.
social isolation : When an individual has a relative lack of connections to others.
social mobility : The movement of individuals from one social position into another. Intergenerational social mobility is a measure of the extent to which parents and their children have similar or different social and economic positions in adulthood. Upward mobility is said to occur when an individual’s class is higher than that of his or her parents; downward mobility is the opposite.
social movement : A conscious, concerted, and sustained effort by ordinary people to change (or preserve) some aspect of their society by using extrainstitutional means. “Extrainstitutional means” refers to collective actions undertaken outside existing institutions, like courts and legislatures, although movements may also work through such institutions, at least part of the time.
social movement organization (SMO) : A formal organization that participates in, and may initiate or lead, a social movement. SMOs generally pool resources, like labor and money, which may be crucial for movements. Some movements encompass a number of SMOs that alternately cooperate and compete with one another.
social network : The ties or connections between people, groups, and organizations.
social problem : A term used to capture a wide range of individual, group, or societal behaviors or societal issues that are thought to have harmful consequences. Examples might include poverty, crime, drug abuse, homelessness, inequality, racism, sexism, and discrimination.
social relations of production : One part of the modes of production; the relationships and inequalities between different kinds of people within the economy.
social reproduction : The processes that transmit inequality from one generation to the next.
Social Security : In the United States, an umbrella term for legislation passed in 1935 which included pension (income) benefits for retired workers and citizens over 65, which is paid for through taxes on current workers.
social solidarity : The social forces that hold any society together.
social stratification : A subfield of sociology that examines inequalities among individuals and groups.
social structure : The external forces, most notably social hierarchy, norms, and institutions, that provide the context for individual and group action.
social theory : An overarching framework that suggests certain assumptions and assertions about the way the world works. These frameworks are used for posing research questions and evaluating evidence related to those questions.
social ties : The various types of connections individuals make with other people.
socialism : An economic system where the government owns some or most of all productive enterprises and makes decisions about the amount and type of goods and services to be produced.
socialist (mode of production) : In Marxist theory, a socialist mode of production is one in which the productive forces of society are collectively owned (not by individual business owners).
socialization : The process by which individuals come to understand the expectations and norms of their groups as well as the various roles they transition into over the life course and how to behave in society or in particular social settings.
socially deviant : Behavior that violates the written or unwritten rules of society.
society : A large group of people who live in the same area and participate in a common economy or culture.
socioeconomic gradient : Reflects that those with the lowest status are less healthy than those in the middle, who are less healthy than those at the top.
socioeconomic status (SES) : A broad definition of a person’s social class based on components such as education, income, and occupation.
sociological imagination : The capacity to think systematically about how many things we experience as personal problems—for example, debt from student loans, competing demands from divorced parents, or an inability to form a rewarding romantic relationship at college—are really social issues that are widely shared by others born in a similar time and social location as us. It involves taking into account how our individual lives are impacted by historical and social contexts.
sociology : The study of societies and the social worlds that individuals inhabit within them.
soft skills : Also called noncognitive traits, these are social skills—such as knowing how to dress, the ability to hold a sophisticated conversation, or interacting well with a variety of other people—that may enhance a person’s job performance.
spatial concentration : When significant numbers of people from the same group, such as a racial or ethnic group, live in the same physical location, such as a neighborhood or city.
spurious relationship : When two factors seem to move in the same direction but both are themselves caused by something else (i.e., a third factor), sociologists refer to the apparent relationship between the first two factors as a spurious relationship.
state : All of the agencies and offices of governing institutions, including government bureaucracies, law and the legal system, and the military) constitute what sociologists call the state. It is a term that is meant to capture than just the current government in power by incorporating the idea that the there are permanent institutions that are independent of whomever is in power.
state deviance : Deviant behavior by governments or government agencies.
statistically deviant : Behavior that is different or unusual but not necessarily in violation of social norms.
status : A distinct social category that is set off from others and has associated with it a set of expected behaviors and roles for individuals to assume. The category can often involve prestige, such as that accorded to individuals and to important social or economic roles (like “priest,” “lawyer,” “truck driver”). An individual’s status may reflect some accomplishment or position attained, one’s membership in a particular group, or both.
status group : A term invented by Max Weber to describe any group that forms a common identity and develops ways of distinguishing insiders from outsiders.
stayer : One who chooses not to leave.
stereotype : A simplified generalization about a group (e.g., women or men) that is often false or exaggerated. Stereotypes are most often negative, although positive stereotypes can sometimes be found.
stratification system : The full range of social hierarchies found in any society, which create inequalities between individuals and groups.
structural functionalism : A theory of society in which individuals, groups, and the institutions of any society are guided by an overarching social system and can be explained by the needs of society to reproduce itself.
structural individualism : A theory that starts from the proposition that societies rest on the choices and action that individuals make, but in the context of the social forces that shape and constrain individual choice.
structural inertia : The extent to which an organization’s rules and routines are relatively fixed and difficult to change.
stylized facts : A series of facts or empirical regularities that we think we know with great certainty.
subculture : A relatively small group of people whose affiliation is based on shared beliefs, preferences, and practices that distinguish them from the mainstream or larger social group to which they also belong.
suburb : Traditionally, a residential enclave within commuting distance of a city.
suburban sprawl : The continuing geographic spread of sparse residential areas.
supernatural : Attributed to a force or entity beyond scientific understanding and the laws of nature.
survey : A type of research in which information is derived by asking people to answer standardized questions, which may collect information about any aspect of human life of interest to the investigator, including information about jobs, employment, family life, health, education, and policy or political attitudes and values.
sustainability : Refers to a system of development and consumption that satisfies a society’s current needs without imperiling the ability of future generations to do the same.
sweatshop : A workplace that may be characterized by unsafe conditions, very low wages, and harsh working conditions.
symbol : Something that communicates an idea while being distinct from the idea itself.
symbolic boundary : The distinctions people make between themselves and others on the basis of taste, socioeconomic status, morality, or other differences.
symbolic capital : Your reputation.
symbolic interactionism : A theory of the social world that focuses on the meanings that individuals give to objects and social practices and how they use symbolic meanings in their interactions with one another.
syncretic : Combining religious ideas and practices drawn from more than one distinct tradition.
tariff : A tax on goods being imported into a country.
taste : A person’s cultural preferences.
terrorism : A type of warfare in which a weaker group challenges a more powerful group by attacking civilian targets of importance to the more powerful group. State terrorism occurs when a country’s military attacks civilian populations.
theodicy : A justification of the goodness and rightness of god, or more generally of a particular religious system, in the face of the evils of the world.
theology : Discussions and systematic reasoning about god and other religious matters.
theoretical generalizability : The application of conclusions from findings based on a sample or case to larger sociological processes and theories about the world.
theoretical tradition : A conceptual framework or paradigm that sociologists use to imagine and make sense of the world.
thick description : A rich, detailed description of the ways people make sense of their lives.
third immigration era : The period from 1921 to 1965, in which the United States tightly controlled immigration into the United States using strict quotas on entry from different countries.
tool kit : In the sociology of culture, the view that culture is a set of symbolic skills, devices, or strategies that people learn throughout their lives, and can deploy strategically in different situations. The tool kit also supplies a set of ideas to justify a course of action retrospectively.
total fertility rate : A measure of fertility in a given calendar year reflecting the fertility of women at different childbearing ages. A total fertility rate of 3.2 in 2010 in a given population means that the average woman would have 3.2 children during her lifetime, if fertility rates in this population remained the same.
totemism : A belief system in which clans adopt a plant or animal as their group emblem and declare it sacred.
tracking : A term used to describe how schools assign students to distinct groups based on ability or curriculum.
transfer : A term used in immigration research to refer to the transfer of money from an immigrant back home, or to an immigrant from her or his family back home.
transgendered : Individuals who were assigned one sex category at birth based on anatomical criteria but who come to believe they belong in the other gender category and take action to be in the other category.
transnational corporation (TNC) : A company with business operations in multiple countries.
unanticipated consequences of social action : The idea that the outcomes of any action we undertake may well be unanticipated, as for example when we get a dog for companionship but soon make new human friends who take their dogs for exercise at the same park we do.
unauthorized migrant : A person living in a country where he or she is not legally allowed to reside. In current political discussions, these individuals are often referred to as “illegal immigrants.”
union : An organized association of workers created in order to protect and fight for rights or resources for their members. Unions can be organized at a single workplace, across multiple workplaces of the same company or in the same industry.
urban area : A geographic area with a high population density (e.g., 1,000 individuals per square mile).
urban ecology : An approach to the study of cities, social change, and urban life introduced into sociology by the Chicago School to explain how different social groups within cities compete over scarce resources. This competition was thought to promote efficiency and social equilibrium, as distinct sectors of the population adapted to their local environments.
urban ghetto : A section of a city that is characterized by severe racial or ethnic segregation and deep poverty.
urban renewal : The attempt to improve impoverished areas by tearing down existing structures and even whole neighborhoods. In the mid-twentieth century, at the height of the urban renewal movement, many working-class neighborhoods across America were destroyed, in many cases benefiting real estate developers and business interests who moved in and redeveloped the areas.
urbanization : The growth of cities.
validity : The extent to which the measurement a researcher uses accurately measures what it is intended to measure.
value : A judgment about what is intrinsically important or meaningful. When it comes to research, values held by sociologists shape their views of and perspectives on the questions they ask.
visa : A legal status specifying the terms and length under which someone may live (or visit) another country. It may range from permission to enter for a few days to being allowed to live there permanently (in the United States, the latter type of visa is known as a “green card”).
war on drugs : The United States‘ effort to reduce the sale and consumption of illegal drugs by increasing police surveillance and punishment of drug offenders.
war on terror : The U.S. government’s effort to combat terrorism, especially in the period since the attacks of September 11, 2001.
Washington Consensus : The common prescriptions of Washington, D.C.–based organizations such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the U.S. Treasury Department for how developing countries should respond to economic problems or crises. These prescriptions typically suggest that developing countries should engage in free trade, reduce the role and expense of government, and more generally encourage the growth of free markets.
wealth : The wealth of an individual or family is the net value of all assets owned by an individual or family, including the value of their home.
weighting : In a survey where there are differences between some known property of the population being studied and the completed interviews (such as the percentage of women, or minorities, or some other key population characteristic), the results can be adjusted by giving slightly more importance to the responses of each member of an undersampled group.
welfare state : The bundle of programs that provide social insurance and social assistance for people falling into one or another category of attributes (such as old age, disability, or poverty). The most important types of welfare-state programs are old-age pensions (known in the United States as Social Security), health insurance programs, unemployment insurance, job training programs, and general welfare assistance for the very poor. Some analysts also include education in the mix of programs considered part of the welfare state.
well-being : The different dimensions of life that are essential to our everyday lives. Among the most important aspects of well-being are health, exposure to crime and violence, exposure to environmental risks like air or water pollution, and even one’s general level of happiness.
white flight : A term used to describe the large-scale migration of white families in the United States in the mid-twentieth century out of racially mixed cities and urban neighborhoods to racially homogeneous suburban areas.
white privilege : A concept that refers to the advantages of being white versus non-White. White Americans, on average, have higher earnings, greater freedom to choose where to live, more opportunities for upward mobility, and less likelihood of being arrested than other racial groups. They are also less burdened by negative stereotypes.
white-collar crime : Illegal activities undertaken by businesses or by individuals working for corporations.
working poor : People who do not make enough income to be free from poverty, even if they work full time.
