absolute poverty : The minimal requirements necessary to sustain a healthy existence.
activity theory : A functionalist theory of aging, which holds that busy, engaged people are more likely to lead fulfilling and productive lives.
age-grades : The system found in small traditional cultures by which people belonging to a similar age group are categorized together and hold similar rights and obligations.
ageism : Discrimination or prejudice against a person on the grounds of age.
agency : The ability to think, act, and make choices independently.
agents of socialization : Groups or social contexts within which processes of socialization take place.
aging : The combination of biological, psychological, and social processes that affect people as they grow older.
agrarian societies : Societies whose means of subsistence are based on agricultural production (crop growing).
alienation : The sense that our own abilities as human beings are taken over by other entities. The term was originally used by Karl Marx to refer to the projection of human powers onto gods. Subsequently he used the term to refer to the loss of workers’ control over the nature and products of their labor.
anomie : A concept first brought into wide usage in sociology by Durkheim, referring to a situation in which social norms lose their hold over individual behavior.
assimilation : The acceptance of a minority group by a majority population, in which the new group takes on the values and norms of the dominant culture.
authority : A government’s legitimate use of power.
automation : Production processes monitored and controlled by machines with only minimal supervision from people.
biological determinism : The belief that differences we observe between groups of people, such as men and women, are explained wholly by biological causes.
biomedical model of health : The set of principles underpinning Western medical systems and practices. The biomedical model of health defines diseases objectively, in accordance with the presence of recognized symptoms, and holds that the healthy body can be restored through scientifically based medical treatment. The human body is likened to a machine that can be returned to working order with the proper repairs.
black feminism : A strand of feminist theory that highlights the multiple disadvantages of gender, class, and race that shape the experiences of nonwhite women. Black feminists reject the idea of a single, unified gender oppression that is experienced evenly by all women and argue that early feminist analysis reflected the specific concerns of white, middle-class women.
blue- and pink-collar jobs : Jobs that typically pay low wages and often involve manual or low-skill labor. Blue-collar jobs typically are held by men (e.g., factory worker), whereas pink-collar jobs are typically held by women (e.g., clerical assistant).
bourgeoisie : People who own companies, land, or stocks (shares) and use these to generate economic returns, according to Marx.
broken windows theory : A theory proposing that even small acts of crime, disorder, and vandalism can threaten a neighborhood and render it unsafe.
bureaucracy : A type of organization marked by a clear hierarchy of authority and the existence of written rules of procedure and staffed by full-time, salaried officials.
capitalism : An economic system based on the private ownership of wealth, which is invested and reinvested in order to produce profit.
caste society : A society in which different social levels are closed, so that all individuals must remain at the social level of their birth throughout life.
caste system : A social system in which one’s social status is determined at birth and set for life.
church : A large, established religious body, normally having a formal, bureaucratic structure and a hierarchy of religious officials. The term is also used to refer to the place in which religious ceremonies are carried out.
citizen : A member of a political community, having both rights and duties associated with that membership.
civil inattention : The process whereby individuals in the same physical setting demonstrate to each another that they are aware of the other’s presence.
civil rights : Legal rights held by all citizens in a given national community.
civil society : The realm of activity that lies between the state and the market, including the family, schools, community associations, and other noneconomic institutions. Civil society, or civic culture, is essential to vibrant democratic societies.
class : Although it is one of the most frequently used concepts in sociology, there is no clear agreement about how the term should be defined. Most sociologists use the term to refer to socioeconomic variations among groups of individuals that create variations in their material prosperity and power.
clock time : Time as measured by the clock, in terms of hours, minutes, and seconds. Before the invention of clocks, time reckoning was based on events in the natural world, such as the rising and setting of the sun.
cognition : Human thought processes involving perception, reasoning, and remembering.
cohabitation : Two people living together in a sexual relationship of some permanence without being married to each other.
collective bargaining : The rights of employees and workers to negotiate with their employers for basic rights and benefits.
colonialism : The process whereby Western nations established their rule in parts of the world away from their home territories.
communism : A set of political ideas associated with Marx, as developed particularly by Lenin and institutionalized in the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and some developing countries.
community policing : A renewed emphasis on crime prevention rather than law enforcement to reintegrate policing within the community.
comparable worth : Policies that attempt to remedy the gender pay gap by adjusting pay so that those in female-dominated jobs are not paid less for equivalent work.
comparative questions : Questions concerned with drawing comparisons among different human societies for the purposes of sociological theory or research.
comparative research : Research that compares one set of findings on one society with the same type of findings on other societies.
complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) : A diverse set of approaches and therapies for treating different illnesses and promoting well-being that generally falls outside of standard medical practices.
compulsion of proximity : People’s need to interact with others in their presence.
concrete operational stage : A stage of human cognitive development, as formulated by Jean Piaget, in which the child’s thinking is based primarily on physical perception of the world. In this phase, the child is not yet capable of dealing with abstract concepts or hypothetical situations.
conflict theory : Argument that deviance is deliberately chosen and often political in nature.
constitutional monarchs : Kings or queens who are largely figureheads. Real power rests in the hands of other political leaders.
continuity theory : Theoretical perspective on aging that specifies that older adults fare best when they participate in activities consistent with their personality, preferences, and activities earlier in life.
control theory : A theory that views crime as the outcome of an imbalance between impulses toward criminal activity and controls that deter it. Control theorists hold that criminals are rational beings who will act to maximize their own reward unless they are rendered unable to do so through either social or physical controls.
conurbation : An agglomeration of towns or cities into an unbroken urban environment.
conversation analysis : The empirical study of conversations, employing techniques drawn from ethnomethodology. Conversation analysis examines details of naturally occurring conversations to reveal the organizational principles of talk and its role in the production and reproduction of social order.
core countries : According to world-systems theory, the most advanced industrial countries, which take the lion’s share of profits in the world economic system.
corporate crime : Offenses committed by large corporations in society, including pollution, false advertising, and violations of health and safety regulations.
corporate culture : An organizational culture involving rituals, events, or traditions that are unique to a specific company.
corporations : Business firms or companies.
correlation coefficient : A measure of the degree of correlation between variables.
created environment : Constructions established by human beings to serve their needs, derived from the use of man-made technology—including, for example, roads, railways, factories, offices, private homes, and other buildings.
crime : Any action that contravenes the laws established by a political authority. Although we may think of criminals as a distinct subsection of the population, there are few people who have not broken the law in one way or another during their lives. While laws are formulated by state authorities, it is not unknown for those authorities to engage in criminal behavior in certain situations.
crude birthrate : A statistical measure representing the number of births within a given population per year, normally calculated as the number of births per 1,000 members. Although the crude birthrate is a useful index, it is only a general measure, because it does not specify numbers of births in relation to age distribution.
crude death rate : A statistical measure representing the number of deaths that occur annually in a given population per year, normally calculated as the number of deaths per 1,000 members. Crude death rates give a general indication of the mortality levels of a community or society, but are limited in their usefulness because they do not take into account the age distribution.
cult : A fragmentary religious grouping to which individuals are loosely affiliated but which lacks any permanent structure.
cultural capital : Noneconomic or cultural resources that parents pass down to their children, such as language or knowledge. These resources contribute to the process of social reproduction, according to Bourdieu.
cultural relativism : The practice of judging a society by its own standards.
cultural universals : Values or modes of behavior shared by all human cultures.
culture : The values, norms, and material goods characteristic of a given group. Like the concept of society, the notion of culture is widely used in sociology and the other social sciences (particularly anthropology). Culture is one of the most distinctive properties of human social association.
culture of poverty : The thesis, popularized by Oscar Lewis, that poverty is not a result of individual inadequacies but is instead the outcome of a larger social and cultural atmosphere into which successive generations of children are socialized. The culture of poverty refers to the values, beliefs, lifestyles, habits, and traditions that are common among people living under conditions of material deprivation.
data : Factual information used as a basis for reasoning, discussion, or calculation. Social science data often refer to individuals’ responses to survey questions.
debriefing : Following a research study, the investigator will inform study participants about the true purpose of the study, and will reveal any deception that happened during the study.
degree of dispersal : The range or distribution of a set of figures.
democracy : A political system that allows the citizens to participate in political decision making or to elect representatives to government bodies.
democratic elitism : A theory of the limits of democracy, which holds that in large-scale societies democratic participation is necessarily limited to the regular election of political leaders.
demographic transition : An interpretation of population change, which holds that a stable ratio of births to deaths is achieved once a certain level of economic prosperity has been reached. According to this notion, in preindustrial societies there is a rough balance between births and deaths, because population increase is kept in check by a lack of available food, by disease, or by war. In modern societies, by contrast, population equilibrium is achieved because families are moved by economic incentives to limit the number of children.
demography : The study of the size, distribution, and composition of populations.
denomination : A religious sect that has lost its revivalist dynamism and become an institutionalized body, commanding the adherence of significant numbers of people.
dependency culture : A term popularized by Charles Murray to describe individuals who rely on state welfare provision rather than entering the labor market. The dependency culture is seen as the outcome of the “paternalistic” welfare state that undermines individual ambition and people’s capacity for self-help.
dependency ratio : The ratio of people of dependent ages (children and the elderly) to people of economically active ages.
dependency theories : Marxist theories of economic development arguing that the poverty of low-income countries stems directly from their exploitation by wealthy countries and the multinational corporations that are based in wealthy countries.
developing world : The less-developed societies, in which industrial production is either virtually nonexistent or only developed to a limited degree. The majority of the world’s population live in less-developed countries.
developmental questions : Questions that sociologists pose when looking at the origins and path of development of social institutions from the past to the present.
deviance : Modes of action that do not conform to the norms or values held by most members of a group or society. What is regarded as deviant is as variable as the norms and values that distinguish different cultures and subcultures from one another. Forms of behavior that are highly esteemed by one group are regarded negatively by others.
deviant subculture : A subculture whose members hold values that differ substantially from those of the majority.
diaspora : The dispersal of an ethnic population from an original homeland into foreign areas, often in a forced manner or under traumatic circumstances.
differential association : An interpretation of the development of criminal behavior proposed by Edwin H. Sutherland, according to whom criminal behavior is learned through association with others who regularly engage in crime.
direct democracy : A form of participatory democracy that allows citizens to vote directly on laws and policies.
discrimination : Behavior that denies to the members of a particular group resources or rewards that can be obtained by others. Discrimination must be distinguished from prejudice: Individuals who are prejudiced against others may not engage in discriminatory practices against them; conversely, people may act in a discriminatory fashion toward a group even though they are not prejudiced against that group.
disengagement theory : A functionalist theory of aging that holds that it is functional for society to remove people from their traditional roles when they become elderly, thereby freeing up those roles for others.
displacement : The transferring of ideas or emotions from their true source to another object.
division of labor : The specialization of work tasks, by means of which different occupations are combined within a production system. All societies have at least some rudimentary form of division of labor, especially between the tasks allocated to men and those performed by women. With the development of industrialism, the division of labor became vastly more complex than in any prior type of production system. In the modern world, the division of labor is international in scope.
dominant group : The opposite of a minority group; the dominant group possesses more wealth, power, and prestige in a society.
doubling time : The time it takes for a particular level of population to double.
downward mobility : Social mobility in which individuals’ wealth, income, or status is lower than what they or their parents once had.
dyad : A group consisting of two persons.
ecological approach : A perspective on urban analysis emphasizing the “natural” distribution of city neighborhoods into areas having contrasting characteristics.
economic interdependence : The fact that in the division of labor, individuals depend on others to produce many or most of the goods they need to sustain their lives.
economy : The system of production and exchange that provides for the material needs of individuals living in a given society. Economic institutions are of key importance in all social orders. What goes on in the economy usually influences other areas in social life. Modern economies differ substantially from traditional ones, because the majority of the population is no longer engaged in agricultural production.
egocentric : According to Jean Piaget, the characteristic quality of a child during the early years of his or her life. Egocentric thinking involves understanding objects and events in the environment solely in terms of the child’s own position.
emerging economies : Developing countries that over the past two or three decades have begun to develop a strong industrial base, such as Singapore and Hong Kong.
emigration : The movement of people out of one country in order to settle in another.
empirical investigation : Factual inquiry carried out in any area of sociological study.
encounter : A meeting between two or more people in a situation of face-to-face interaction. Our daily lives can be seen as a series of different encounters strung out across the course of the day. In modern societies, many of these encounters are with strangers rather than people we know.
endogamy : The forbidding of marriage or sexual relations outside one’s social group.
entrepreneur : The owner or founder of a business firm.
environmental ecology : A concern with preserving the integrity of the physical environment in the face of the impact of modern industry and technology.
ethnicity : Cultural values and norms that distinguish the members of a given group from others. An ethnic group is one whose members share a distinct awareness of a common cultural identity, separating them from other groups. In virtually all societies, ethnic differences are associated with variations in power and material wealth. Where ethnic differences are also racial, such divisions are sometimes especially pronounced.
ethnocentrism : The tendency to look at other cultures through the eyes of one’s own culture, and thereby misrepresent them.
ethnography : The firsthand study of people using participant observation or interviewing.
ethnomethodology : The study of how people make sense of what others say and do in the course of day-to-day social interaction. Ethnomethodology is concerned with the “ethnomethods” by which people sustain meaningful exchanges with one another.
experiment : A research method in which variables can be analyzed in a controlled and systematic way, either in an artificial situation constructed by the researcher or in naturally occurring settings.
exponential growth : A geometric, rather than linear, rate of increase. Populations tend to grow exponentially.
extended family : A family group consisting of more than two generations of relatives.
external risk : Dangers that spring from the natural world and are unrelated to the actions of humans. Examples of external risk include droughts, earthquakes, famines, and storms.
exurban country : A county that lies within a large metropolitan area but has less than 25 percent of its population in an urbanized area. Tends to sit at periphery of metropolitan areas.
factual questions : Questions that raise issues concerning matters of fact (rather than theoretical or moral issues).
family : A group of individuals related to one another by blood ties, marriage, or adoption, who form an economic unit, the adult members of which are often responsible for the upbringing of children. All known societies involve some form of family system, although the nature of family relationships varies widely. While in modern societies the main family form is the nuclear family, extended family relationships are also found.
family capitalism : Capitalistic enterprise owned and administered by entrepreneurial families.
family of orientation : The family into which an individual is born or adopted.
family of procreation : The family an individual initiates through marriage or by having children.
fecundity : A measure of the number of children that it is biologically possible for a woman to produce.
feminism : Advocacy of the rights of women to be equal with men in all spheres of life. Feminism dates from the late eighteenth century in Europe, and feminist movements exist in most countries today.
feminist theory : A sociological perspective that emphasizes the centrality of gender in analyzing the social world and particularly the experiences of women. There are many strands of feminist theory, but they all share the intention to explain gender inequalities in society and to work to overcome them.
feminization of poverty : An increase in the proportion of the poor who are female.
fertility : The average number of live-born children produced by women of childbearing age in a particular society.
focused interaction : Interaction between individuals engaged in a common activity or in direct conversation with each another.
folkways : A subtype of norm; they guide our casual or everyday interactions. Violations are sanctioned subtly or not at all.
formal operational stage : According to Jean Piaget, a stage of human cognitive development at which the growing child becomes capable of handling abstract concepts and hypothetical situations.
formal organization : Means by which a group is rationally designed to achieve its objectives, often using explicit rules, regulations, and procedures.
formal relations : Relations that exist in groups and organizations, laid down by the norms, or rules, of the official system of authority.
franchise : The right to vote.
functional literacy : Having reading and writing skills that are beyond a basic level and are sufficient to manage one’s everyday activities and employment tasks.
functionalism : A theoretical perspective based on the notion that social events can best be explained in terms of the functions they perform—that is, the contributions they make to the continuity of a society.
gender : Social expectations about behavior regarded as appropriate for the members of each sex. Gender refers not to the physical attributes distinguishing men and women but to socially formed traits of masculinity and femininity. The study of gender relations has become one of the most important areas of sociology in recent years.
gender inequality : The inequality between men and women in terms of wealth, income, and status.
gender socialization : The learning of gender roles through social factors such as schooling, the media, and family.
gender typing : Designation of occupations as male or female, with “women’s” occupations, such as secretarial and retail positions, having lower status and pay, and “men’s” occupations, such as managerial and professional positions, having higher status and pay.
generalized other : A concept in the theory of George Herbert Mead, according to which the individual takes over the general values of a given group or society during the socialization process.
genocide : The systematic, planned destruction of a racial, political, or cultural group.
gentrification : A process of urban renewal in which older, deteriorated housing is refurbished by affluent people moving into the area.
glass ceiling : A promotion barrier that prevents a woman’s upward mobility within an organization.
global city : A city—such as London, New York, or Tokyo—that has become an organizing center of the new global economy.
global commodity chain : A worldwide network of labor and production processes yielding a finished product.
global inequality : The systematic differences in wealth and power among countries.
globalization : The economic, political, and social interconnectedness of individuals and nations throughout the world.
government : The enacting of policies and decisions on the part of officials within a political apparatus. While in the past virtually all governments were headed by monarchs or emperors, in most modern societies governments are run by officials who do not inherit their positions of power but are elected or appointed on the basis of qualifications.
groupthink : A process by which the members of a group ignore ways of thinking and plans of action that go against the group consensus.
hate crime : A criminal act by an offender who is motivated by some bias, such as racism, sexism, or homophobia.
heterosexuality : Sexual or romantic attraction to persons of the opposite sex.
hidden curriculum : Traits of behavior or attitudes that are learned at school but not included within the formal curriculum—for example, gender differences.
home schooling : A growing trend (but a longtime practice) of parents or guardians educating their children at home, for religious, philosophical, or safety reasons.
homosexuality : Sexual or romantic attraction of persons of one’s own sex.
housework : Unpaid work carried on in the home, usually by women; domestic chores such as cooking, cleaning, and shopping. Also called domestic labor.
human resource management : A style of management that regards a company’s workforce as vital to its economic competitiveness.
hypothesis : An idea or a guess about a given state of affairs, put forward as a basis for empirical testing.
ideal type : A “pure type,” constructed by emphasizing certain traits of a social item that do not necessarily exist in reality. An example is Max Weber’s ideal type of bureaucratic organization.
ideology : Shared ideas or beliefs that serve to justify the interests of dominant groups. Ideologies are found in all societies in which there are systematic and ingrained inequalities among groups. The concept of ideology connects closely with that of power, since ideological systems serve to legitimize the power that groups hold.
immigration : The movement of people into one country from another for the purpose of settlement.
impression management : Preparing for the presentation of one’s social role.
income : Payment, usually derived from wages, salaries, or investments.
industrialization : The emergence of machine production, based on the use of inanimate power resources (such as steam or electricity).
industrialized societies : Highly developed nation-states in which the majority of the population work in factories or offices rather than in agriculture, and most people live in urban areas.
infant mortality rate : The number of infants who die during the first year of life, per 1,000 live births.
infanticide : The intentional killing of a newborn. Female babies are more likely than male babies to be murdered in cultures that devalue women.
informal economy : Economic transactions carried on outside the sphere of formal paid employment.
informal networks : Relations that exist in groups and organizations developed on the basis of personal connections; ways of doing things that depart from formally recognized modes of procedure.
information society : A society no longer based primarily on the production of material goods but on the production of knowledge. The notion of the information society is closely bound up with the rise of information technology.
information technology : Forms of technology based on information processing and requiring microelectronic circuitry.
informed consent : The process whereby the study investigator informs potential participants about the risks and benefits involved in the research study. Informed consent must be obtained before an individual participates in a study.
in-group : A group toward which one feels particular loyalty and respect—the group to which “we” belong.
inner city : The areas composing the central neighborhoods of a city, as distinct from the suburbs. In many modern urban settings in industrialized nations inner-city areas are subject to dilapidation and decay, the more affluent residents having moved to outlying areas.
instinct : A fixed pattern of behavior that has genetic origins and that appears in all normal animals within a given species.
institutional capitalism : Capitalistic enterprise organized on the basis of institutional shareholding.
institutional racism : Patterns of discrimination based on ethnicity that have become structured into existing social institutions.
intelligence : Level of intellectual ability, particularly as measured by IQ (intelligence quotient) tests.
interactional vandalism : The deliberate subversion of the tacit rules of conversation.
interest group : A group organized to pursue specific interests in the political arena, operating primarily by lobbying the members of legislative bodies.
intergenerational mobility : Movement up or down a social stratification hierarchy from one generation to another.
intragenerational mobility : Movement up or down a social stratification hierarchy within the course of a personal career.
IQ (intelligence quotient) : A score attained on tests of symbolic or reasoning abilities.
iron law of oligarchy : A term coined by Weber’s student Robert Michels meaning that large organizations tend toward centralization of power, making democracy difficult.
kinship : A relation that links individuals through blood ties, marriage, or adoption. Kinship relations are by definition part of marriage and the family, but extend much more broadly. While in most modern societies few social obligations are involved in kinship relations extending beyond the immediate family, in other cultures kinship is of vital importance to social life.
knowledge economy : A society no longer based primarily on the production of material goods but based instead on the production of knowledge. Its emergence has been linked to the development of a broad base of consumers who are technologically literate and have made new advances in computing, entertainment, and telecommunications part of their lives.
knowledge society : Another common term for information society—a society based on the production and consumption of knowledge and information.
labeling theory : An approach to the study of deviance that suggests that people become “deviant” because certain labels are attached to their behavior by political authorities and others.
language : The primary vehicle of meaning and communication in a society, language is a system of symbols that represent objects and abstract thoughts.
latent functions : Functional consequences that are not intended or recognized by the members of a social system in which they occur.
law : A rule of behavior established by a political authority and backed by state power.
leader : A person who is able to influence the behavior of other members of a group.
liberal democracies : A type of representative democracy in which elected representatives hold power.
liberal feminism : Form of feminist theory that believes that gender inequality is produced by unequal access to civil rights and certain social resources, such as education and employment, based on sex. Liberal feminists tend to seek solutions through changes in legislation that ensure that the rights of individuals are protected.
liberation theology : An activist Catholic religious movement that combines Catholic beliefs with a passion for social justice for the poor.
life chances : A term introduced by Max Weber to signify a person’s opportunities for achieving economic prosperity.
life course : The various transitions and stages people experience during their lives.
life course theory : A perspective based on the assumptions that the aging process is shaped by historical time and place. Individuals make choices that reflect both opportunities and constraints. Aging is a lifelong process, and the relationships, events, and experiences of early life have consequences for later life.
life expectancy : The number of years the average person can expect to live.
life span : The maximum length of life that is biologically possible for a member of a given species.
linguistic relativity hypothesis : A hypothesis, based on the theories of Edward Sapir and Benjamin Lee Whorf, that perceptions are relative to language.
literacy : The ability to read and write.
local nationalisms : The beliefs that communities that share a cultural identity should have political autonomy, even within smaller units of a nation-state.
lower class : A social class composed of those who work part time or not at all and whose household income is typically low.
macrosociology : The study of large-scale groups, organizations, or social systems.
Malthusianism : A doctrine about population dynamics developed by Thomas Malthus, according to which population increase comes up against “natural limits,” represented by famine and war.
managerial capitalism : Capitalistic enterprises administered by managerial executives rather than by owners.
manifest functions : The functions of a particular social activity that are known to and intended by the individuals involved in the activity.
manufactured risk : Dangers that are created by the impact of human knowledge and technology on the natural world. Examples of manufactured risk include global warming and genetically modified foods.
market-oriented theories : Theories about economic development that assume that the best possible economic consequences will result if individuals are free to make their own economic decisions, uninhibited by governmental constraint.
marriage : A socially approved sexual relationship between two individuals. Through much of history, marriage involved two persons of opposite sexes, but in the past decade, same-sex couples have gained legal access to marriage in some parts of the world. Marriage normally forms the basis of a family of procreation—that is, it is expected that the married couple will produce and raise children. Some societies and subcultures permit polygamy, in which an individual may have more than one spouse at the same time.
Marxism : A body of thought deriving its main elements from Karl Marx’s ideas.
material goods : The physical objects that a society creates; these influence the ways in which people live.
materialist conception of history : The view developed by Marx, according to which material, or economic, factors have a prime role in determining historical change.
matrilocal family : A family system in which the husband is expected to live near the wife’s parents.
mean : A statistical measure of central tendency, or average, based on dividing a total by the number of individual cases.
means of production : The means whereby the production of material goods is carried on in a society, including not just technology but the social relations among producers.
measures of central tendency : The ways of calculating averages.
median : The number that falls halfway in a range of numbers—a way of calculating central tendency that is sometimes more useful than calculating a mean.
Medicare : A program under the U.S. Social Security Administration that reimburses hospitals and physicians for medical care provided to qualifying people over sixty-five years old.
megalopolis : The “city of all cities” in ancient Greece—used in modern times to refer to very large conurbations.
melting pot : The idea that ethnic differences can be combined to create new patterns of behavior drawing on diverse cultural sources.
microsociology : The study of human behavior in contexts of face-to-face interaction.
middle class : A social class composed broadly of those working in white-collar and lower managerial occupations.
minority group : A group of people who are in a minority in a given society and who, because of their distinct physical or cultural characteristics, find themselves in situations of inequality within that society. Also known as ethnic minority.
mode : The number that appears most often in a given set of data. This can sometimes be a helpful way of portraying central tendency.
modernization theory : A version of market-oriented development theory that argues that low-income societies develop economically only if they give up their traditional ways and adopt modern economic institutions, technologies, and cultural values that emphasize savings and productive investment.
monogamy : A form of marriage in which each married partner is allowed only one spouse at any given time.
monopoly : A situation in which a single firm dominates in a given industry.
mores : A subtype of norm; they are widely adhered to and have great moral or social significance. Violations are generally sanctioned strongly.
mortality : The number of deaths in a population.
multiculturalism : The viewpoint according to which ethnic groups can exist separately and share equally in economic and political life.
nationalism : A set of beliefs and symbols expressing identification with a national community.
nation-state : A particular type of state, characteristic of the modern world, in which a government has sovereign power within a defined territorial area, and the population are citizens who know themselves to be part of a single nation. Nation-states are closely associated with the rise of nationalism, although nationalist loyalties do not always conform to the boundaries of specific states. Nation-states developed as part of an emerging nation-state system, originating in Europe; in current times, they span the whole globe.
neoliberalism : The economic belief that free-market forces, achieved by minimizing government restrictions on business, provide the only route to economic growth.
network : A set of informal and formal social ties that links people to one another.
new criminology : A branch of criminological thought, prominent in Great Britain in the 1970s, that regarded deviance as deliberately chosen and often political in nature. The new criminologists argued that crime and deviance could be understood only in the context of power and inequality within society.
new-style terrorism : A recent form of terrorism characterized by global ambitions, loose global organizational ties, and a more ruthless attitude toward the violence the terrorists are willing to use.
nonverbal communication : Communication between individuals based on facial expression or bodily gestures rather than on language.
norms : Rules of conduct that specify appropriate behavior in a given range of social situations. A norm either prescribes a given type of behavior or forbids it. All human groups follow norms, which are always backed by sanctions of one kind or another— varying from informal disapproval to physical punishment.
nuclear family : A family group consisting of an adult or adult couple and their dependent children.
obesity : Excessive body weight indicated by a body mass index (BMI) over 30.
occupation : Any form of paid employment in which an individual regularly works.
old old : Sociological term for persons between the ages of seventy-five and eighty-four.
oldest old : Sociological term for persons age eighty-five and older.
old-style terrorism : A type of terrorism that is local and linked to particular states and has limited objectives, which means that the violence involved is fairly limited.
oligarchy : Rule by a small minority within an organization or society.
oligopoly : The domination of a small number of firms in a given industry.
oral history : Interviews with people about events they witnessed or experienced at some point earlier in their lives.
organic solidarity : According to Émile Durkheim, the social cohesion that results from the various parts of a society functioning as an integrated whole.
organization : A large group of individuals with a definite set of authority relations. Many types of organizations exist in industrialized societies, influencing most aspects of our lives. While not all organizations are bureaucratic, there are close links between the development of organizations and bureaucratic tendencies.
organized crime : Criminal activities carried out by organizations established as businesses.
out-group : A group toward which one feels antagonism and contempt—”those people.”
pariah groups : Groups that suffer from negative status discrimination—they are looked down on by most other members of society. The Jews, for example, have been a pariah group throughout much of European history.
participant observation : A method of research widely used in sociology and anthropology in which the researcher takes part in the activities of the group or community being studied. Also called fieldwork.
participatory democracy : A system of democracy in which all members of a group or community participate collectively in making major decisions.
pastoral societies : Societies whose subsistence derives from the rearing of domesticated animals.
patriarchy : The dominance of men over women. All known societies are patriarchal, although there are variations in the degree and nature of the power men exercise, as compared with women. One of the prime objectives of women’s movements in modern societies is to combat existing patriarchal institutions.
patrilocal family : A family system in which the wife is expected to live near the husband’s parents.
peer group : A friendship group composed of individuals of similar age and social status.
peripheral countries : Countries that have a marginal role in the world economy and are thus dependent on the core producing societies for their trading relationships.
personal space : The physical space individuals maintain between themselves and others.
personal troubles : Difficulties that are located in individual biographies and their immediate milieu, a seemingly private experience.
personality stabilization : According to the theory of functionalism, the family plays a crucial role in assisting its adult members emotionally. Marriage between adults is the arrangement through which adult personalities are supported and kept healthy.
pilot study : A trial run in survey research.
pluralism : A model for ethnic relations in which all ethnic groups in a society retain their independent and separate identities, yet share equally in the rights and powers of citizenship.
pluralist theories of modern democracy : Theories that emphasize the role of diverse and potentially competing interest groups, none of which dominate the political process.
political rights : Rights of political participation, such as the right to vote in local and national elections, held by citizens of a national community.
politics : The means by which power is employed to influence the nature and content of governmental activities. The sphere of the political includes the activities of those in government, but also the actions of others. There are many ways in which people outside the governmental apparatus seek to influence it.
polyandry : A form of marriage in which a woman may have two or more husbands simultaneously.
polygamy : A form of marriage in which a person may have two or more spouses simultaneously.
polygyny : A form of marriage in which a man may have two or more wives simultaneously.
postindustrial society : A postindustrial society is based on the production of information rather than material goods. According to postindustrialists, we are currently experiencing a series of social changes as profound as those that initiated the industrial era some 200 years ago.
postmodernism : The belief that society is no longer governed by history or progress. Postmodern society is highly pluralistic and diverse, with no “grand narrative” guiding its development.
poverty line : An official government measure to define those living in poverty in the United States.
power : The ability of individuals or the members of a group to achieve aims or further the interests they hold. Power is a pervasive element in all human relationships. Many conflicts in society are struggles over power, because how much power an individual or group is able to achieve governs how far they are able to put their wishes into practice.
power elite : Small networks of individuals who, according to C. Wright Mills, hold concentrated power in modern societies.
prejudice : The holding of preconceived ideas about an individual or group, ideas that are resistant to change even in the face of new information. Prejudice may be either positive or negative.
preoperational stage : According to Jean Piaget, a stage of human cognitive development in which the child has advanced sufficiently to master basic modes of logical thought.
primary deviance : According to Edwin Lemert, the actions that cause others to label one as a deviant.
primary group : A group that is characterized by intense emotional ties, face-to-face interaction, intimacy, and a strong, enduring sense of commitment.
primary socialization : The process by which children learn the cultural norms of the society into which they are born. Primary socialization occurs largely in the family.
profane : That which belongs to the mundane, everyday world.
proletariat : People who sell their labor for wages, according to Marx.
psychopath : A specific personality type; such individuals lack the moral sense and concern for others held by most normal people.
public issues : Difficulties or problems that are linked to the institutional and historical possibilities of social structure.
race : Differences in human physical characteristics used to categorize large numbers of individuals.
racialization : The process by which understandings of race are used to classify individuals or groups of people. Racial distinctions are more than ways of describing human differences; they are also important factors in the reproduction of patterns of power and inequality.
racism : The attribution of characteristics of superiority or inferiority to a population sharing certain physically inherited characteristics. Racism is a form of prejudice focusing on physical variations among people. Racist attitudes became entrenched during the period of Western colonial expansion, but also rest on mechanisms of prejudice and discrimination found in human societies today.
radical feminism : Form of feminist theory that believes that gender inequality is the result of male domination in all aspects of social and economic life.
random sampling : Sampling method in which a sample is chosen so that every member of the population has the same probability of being included.
rape : The forcing of non-consensual vaginal, oral, or anal intercourse.
rape culture : Social context where attitudes and norms perpetuate the treatment of women as sexual objects and instill in men a sense of sexual entitlement.
reference group : A group that provides a standard for judging one’s attitudes or behaviors.
refugee : A person who has fled his or her home due to a political, economic, or natural crisis.
regionalization : The division of social life into different regional settings or zones.
relative deprivation : The recognition that one has less than his or her peers.
relative poverty : Poverty defined according to the living standards of the majority in any given society.
religion : A set of beliefs adhered to by the members of a community, incorporating symbols regarded with a sense of awe or wonder together with ritual practices. Religions do not universally involve a belief in supernatural entities.
religious economy : A theoretical framework within the sociology of religion that argues that religions can be fruitfully understood as organizations in competition with one another for followers.
religious nationalism : The linking of strongly held religious convictions with beliefs about a people’s social and political destiny.
representative sample : A sample from a larger population that is statistically typical of that population.
resocialization : The process of learning new norms, values, and behaviors when one joins a new group or takes on a new social role, or when life circumstances change dramatically.
response cries : Seemingly involuntary exclamations individuals make when, for example, being taken by surprise, dropping something inadvertently, or expressing pleasure.
sacred : Describing something that inspires awe or reverence among those who believe in a given set of religious ideas.
sample : A small proportion of a larger population.
sampling : Studying a proportion of individuals or cases from a larger population as representative of that population as a whole.
sanction : A mode of reward or punishment that reinforces socially expected forms of behavior.
scapegoat : An individual or group blamed for wrongs that were not of their doing.
science : The disciplined marshaling of empirical data, combined with theoretical approaches and theories that illuminate or explain those data. Scientific activity combines the creation of new modes of thought with the careful testing of hypotheses and ideas. One major feature that helps distinguish science from other idea systems (such as religion) is the assumption that all scientific ideas are open to criticism and revision.
scientific racism : The use of scientific research or data to justify or reify beliefs about the superiority or inferiority of particular racial groups. Much of the “data” used to justify such claims is flawed or biased.
second shift : The excessive work hours borne by women relative to men; these hours are typically spent on domestic chores following the end of a day of work outside the home.
secondary deviance : According to Edwin Lemert, following the act of primary deviance, secondary deviation occurs when an individual accepts the label of deviant and acts accordingly.
secondary group : A group characterized by its large size and by impersonal, fleeting relationships.
sect : A religious movement that breaks away from orthodoxy.
secular thinking : Worldly thinking, particularly as seen in the rise of science, technology, and rational thought in general.
secularization : A process of decline in the influence of religion. Although modern societies have become increasingly secularized, tracing the extent of secularization is a complex matter. Secularization can refer to levels of involvement with religious organizations (such as rates of church attendance), the social and material influence wielded by religious organizations, and the degree to which people hold religious beliefs.
segregation : The practices of keeping racial and ethnic groups physically separate, thereby maintaining the superior position of the dominant group.
self-consciousness : Awareness of one’s distinct social identity as a person separate from others. Human beings are not born with self-consciousness but acquire an awareness of self as a result of early socialization. The learning of language is of vital importance to the processes by which the child learns to become a self-conscious being.
self-identity : The ongoing process of self-development and definition of our personal identity through which we formulate a unique sense of ourselves and our relationship to the world around us.
semiperipheral countries : Countries that supply sources of labor and raw materials to the core industrial countries and the world economy but are not themselves fully industrialized societies.
sensorimotor stage : According to Jean Piaget, a stage of human cognitive development in which the child’s awareness of his or her environment is dominated by perception and touch.
service society : A concept related to postindustrial society, it refers to a social order distinguished by the growth of service occupations at the expense of industrial jobs that produce material goods.
sex : The biological and anatomical differences distinguishing females from males.
sex segregation : The concentration of men and women in different jobs. These differences are believed to contribute to the gender pay gap.
sexual harassment : The making of unwanted sexual advances by one individual toward another, in which the first person persists even though it is clear that the other party is resistant.
sexual orientation : The direction of one’s sexual or romantic attraction.
shaming : A way of punishing criminal and deviant behavior based on rituals of public disapproval rather than incarceration. The goal of shaming is to maintain the ties of the offender to the community.
short-range downward mobility : Social mobility that occurs when an individual moves from one position in the class structure to another of nearly equal status.
sick role : A term associated with the functionalist Talcott Parsons to describe the patterns of behavior that a sick person adopts in order to minimize the disruptive impact of his or her illness on others.
signifier : Any vehicle of meaning and communication.
slavery : A form of social stratification in which some people are owned by others as their property.
social aggregate : A collection of people who happen to be together in a particular place but do not significantly interact or identify with one another.
social capital : The social knowledge and connections that enable people to accomplish their goals and extend their influence.
social category : People who share a common characteristic (such as gender or occupation) but do not necessarily interact or identify with one another.
social change : Alteration in basic structures of a social group or society. Social change is an ever-present phenomenon in social life, but has become especially intense in the modern era. The origins of modern sociology can be traced to attempts to understand the dramatic changes shattering the traditional world and promoting new forms of social order.
social class gradient in health : The strong inverse association between socioeconomic resources and risk of illness or death.
social conflict theories of aging : Arguments that emphasize the ways in which the larger social structure helps to shape the opportunities available to the elderly. Unequal opportunities are seen as creating the potential for conflict.
social constraint : The conditioning influence on our behavior by the groups and societies of which we are members. Social constraint was regarded by Émile Durkheim as one of the distinctive properties of social facts.
social construction of gender : The learning of gender roles through socialization and interaction with others.
social exclusion : The outcome of multiple deprivations that prevent individuals or groups from participating fully in the economic, social, and political life of the society in which they live.
social facts : According to Émile Durkheim, the aspects of social life that shape our actions as individuals. Durkheim believed that social facts could be studied scientifically.
social gerontologists : Social scientists who study aging and the elderly.
social group : A collection of people who regularly interact with one another on the basis of shared expectations concerning behavior and who share a sense of common identity.
social interaction : The process by which we act and react to those around us.
social mobility : Movement of individuals or groups among different social positions.
social position : The social identity an individual has in a given group or society. Social positions may be general in nature (those associated with gender roles) or may be more specific (occupational positions).
social reproduction : The process whereby societies have structural continuity over time. Social reproduction is an important pathway through which parents transmit or produce values, norms, and social practices among their children.
social rights : Rights of social and welfare provision held by all citizens in a national community, including, for example, the right to claim unemployment benefits and sickness payments provided by the state.
social roles : Socially defined expectations of an individual in a given status, or occupying a particular social position. In every society, individuals play a number of social roles, such as teenager, parent, worker, or political leader.
Social Security : A government program that provides economic assistance to persons faced with unemployment, disability, or old age.
social self : The basis of self-consciousness in human individuals, according to the theory of George Herbert Mead. The social self is the identity conferred upon an individual by the reactions of others. A person achieves self-consciousness by becoming aware of this social identity.
social stratification : The existence of structured inequalities among groups in society, in terms of their access to material or symbolic rewards. While all societies involve some forms of stratification, only with the development of state-based systems did wide differences in wealth and power arise. The most distinctive form of stratification in modern societies is class divisions.
socialization : The social processes through which we develop an awareness of social norms and values and achieve a distinct sense of self. Although socialization processes are particularly significant in infancy and childhood, they continue to some degree throughout life. None of us are immune from the reactions of others around us, which influence and modify our behavior at all phases of our life course.
socialization of nature : The process by which we control phenomena regarded as “natural,” such as reproduction.
society : A group of people who live in a particular territory, are subject to a common system of political authority, and are aware of having a distinct identity from other groups. Some societies, like hunting and gathering societies, are small, numbering no more than a few dozen people. Others are large, numbering millions—modern Chinese society, for instance, has a population of more than a billion people.
sociobiology : An approach that attempts to explain the behavior of both animals and human beings in terms of biological principles.
sociological imagination : The application of imaginative thought to the asking and answering of sociological questions. Someone using the sociological imagination “thinks himself away” from the familiar routines of daily life.
sociology : The study of human groups and societies, giving particular emphasis to analysis of the industrialized world. Sociology is one of a group of social sciences, which include anthropology, economics, political science, and human geography. The divisions among the various social sciences are not clear-cut, and all share a certain range of common interests, concepts, and methods.
sociology of the body : Field that focuses on how our bodies are affected by social influences. Health and illness, for instance, are shaped by social and cultural influences.
sovereignty : The undisputed political rule of a state over a given territorial area.
standard deviation : A way of calculating the spread of a group of figures.
standardized testing : A procedure whereby all students in a state take the same test under the same conditions.
state : A political apparatus (government institutions plus civil service officials) ruling over a given territorial order, whose authority is backed by law and the ability to use force. The emergence of the state marked a distinctive transition in human history, because the centralization of political power involved in state formation introduced new dynamics into processes of social change.
state-centered theories : Development theories that argue that appropriate government policies do not interfere with economic development, but rather can play a key role in bringing it about.
status : The social honor or prestige that a particular group is accorded by other members of a society. Status groups normally display distinct styles of life—patterns of behavior that the members of a group follow. Status privilege may be positive or negative. Pariah status groups are regarded with disdain or treated as outcasts by the majority of the population.
stepfamily : A family in which at least one partner has children from a previous marriage.
stereotype : A fixed and inflexible category.
stigma : Any physical or social characteristic that is labeled by society as undesirable.
strike : A temporary stoppage of work by a group of employees in order to express a grievance or enforce a demand.
structural strain : Tensions that produce conflicting interests within societies.
structuration : The two-way process by which we shape our social world through our individual actions and by which we are reshaped by society.
structure : The recurrent patterned arrangements and hierarchies that influence or limit the choices and opportunities available to us.
subculture : Values and norms distinct from those of the majority, held by a group within a wider society.
suburbanization : The development of suburbia, areas of housing outside inner cities.
suffrage : A legal right to vote guaranteed by the Fifteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution; guaranteed to women by the Nineteenth Amendment.
suffragettes : Members of early women’s movements who pressed for equal voting rights for women and men.
surplus value : In Marxist theory, the value of a worker’s labor power left over when an employer has repaid the cost of hiring the worker.
survey : A method of sociological research in which questionnaires are administered to the population being studied.
sustainable development : The notion that economic growth should proceed only insofar as natural resources are recycled rather than depleted; biodiversity is maintained; and clean air, water, and land are protected.
symbol : One item used to stand for or represent another—as in the case of a flag, which symbolizes a nation.
symbolic interactionism : A theoretical approach in sociology developed by George Herbert Mead that emphasizes the role of symbols and language as core elements of all human interaction.
target hardening : Practical measures used to limit a criminal’s ability to commit crime, such as community policing and use of house alarms.
technology : The application of knowledge of the material world to production; the creation of material instruments (such as machines) used in human interaction with nature.
terrorism : Use of attacks on civilians designed to persuade a government to alter its policies, or to damage its standing in the world.
theism : A belief in one or more supernatural deities.
theoretical questions : Questions posed by sociologists when seeking to explain a particular range of observed events. The asking of theoretical questions is crucial to allowing us to generalize about the nature of social life.
theory of racial formation : The process by which social, economic, and political forces determine the content and importance of racial categories.
time-space : When and where events occur.
tracking : Dividing students into groups according to ability.
transactional leader : A leader who is concerned with accomplishing the group’s tasks, getting group members to do their jobs, and making certain that the group achieves its goals.
transformational leader : A leader who is able to instill in the members of a group a sense of mission or higher purpose, thereby changing the nature of the group itself.
transnational corporations : Business corporations located in two or more countries.
triad : A group consisting of three persons.
triangulation : The use of multiple research methods as a way of producing more reliable empirical data than are available from any single method.
underclass : A class of individuals situated at the bottom of the class system, often composed of people from ethnic minority backgrounds.
unfocused interaction : Interaction occurring among people present in a particular setting but not engaged in direct face-to-face communication.
Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) : Documents that contain official data on crime that are reported to law enforcement agencies that then provide the data to the FBI.
union : An organization that advances and protects the interests of workers with respect to working conditions, wages, and benefits.
universal health coverage : Public health care programs motivated by the goal of providing affordable health services to all members of a population.
upper class : A social class broadly composed of the more affluent members of society, especially those who have inherited wealth, own businesses, or hold large numbers of stocks (shares).
urban ecology : An approach to the study of urban life based on an analogy with the adjustment of plants and organisms to the physical environment. According to ecological theorists, the various neighborhoods and zones within cities are formed as a result of natural processes of adjustment on the part of populations as they compete for resources.
urban renewal : The process of renovating deteriorating neighborhoods by encouraging the renewal of old buildings and the construction of new ones.
urbanism : A term used by Louis Wirth to denote distinctive characteristics of urban social life, such as its impersonal or alienating nature.
urbanization : The development of towns and cities.
values : Ideas held by individuals or groups about what is desirable, proper, good, and bad. What individuals value is strongly influenced by the specific culture in which they happen to live.
wealth : Money and material possessions held by an individual or group.
welfare capitalism : Practice in which large corporations protect their employees from the vicissitudes of the market.
welfare state : A political system that provides a wide range of welfare benefits for its citizens.
white-collar crime : Criminal activities carried out by those in white-collar, or professional, jobs.
work : The activity by which people produce from the natural world and so ensure their survival. Work should not be thought of exclusively as paid employment. In traditional cultures, there was only a rudimentary monetary system, and few people worked for money. In modern societies, there remain types of work that do not involve direct payment (for example, housework).
working class : A social class broadly composed of people working in blue-collar, or manual, occupations.
working poor : People who work, but whose earnings are not enough to lift them above the poverty line.
world-systems theory : Pioneered by Immanuel Wallerstein, this theory emphasizes the interconnections among countries based on the expansion of a capitalist world economy. This economy is made up of core countries, semiperipheral countries, and peripheral countries.
young old : Sociological term for persons between the ages of sixty-five and seventy-four.
absolute poverty : A measure of the minimum requirements needed for people to have basic standards of food, clothing, health, and shelter. Any individual or family falling below this fixed amount is defined as living in poverty. The official U.S. government definition of poverty is an absolute measure based on an estimate of minimum living standards first established in the 1960s and adjusted for inflation thereafter.
access : The ability or right to approach, enter, exit, communicate with, or make use of research sites and materials.
achievement gap : The gap in educational attainment between any two social groups (men and women, whites and non-whites, upper and lower class, etc.).
acid rain : Rain containing acid that is formed when the gaseous air pollutants nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide react with water molecules in the atmosphere.
advance directive : Written instructions (such as a living will) that a person prepares in the event that he or she is no longer able to make decisions at the end of life.
affirmative action : Government policies regarding employment and education that seek to increase the representation of minorities and women in fields from which they have historically been excluded. Affirmative action is undertaken in an effort to counter the historical effects of discrimination and exclusion.
Affordable Care Act : Also known as Obamacare, federal legislation that requires everyone to obtain health insurance, subsidizes cost for low and moderate income families, allows children up to age 26 to stay on their parents’ health insurance, requires insurance companies to offer their policies to everyone (i.e., no limitations on pre-existing conditions), and prevents insurers from cancelling policies before they expire.
age pyramid : A diagram that plots the age distribution of a population, with the numbers at the youngest ages at the bottom of the graph and the numbers at the oldest ages at the top, and with males and females on the left- and right-hand sides, respectively.
agenda setting : The ability to decide which of the many possible topics for discussion, debate, and possible action that exist in the world will actually be considered. Agenda setting can take place in any institutional setting where decision-making occurs.
agnostic : A person who believes that the existence of God or other supernatural beings is unknowable and therefore claims to neither believe or not believe in any faith.
allocation theory : A theory regarding the impacts of education that focuses on how education channels people into positions or institutions that offer different opportunities for continuing to think, learn, and earn.
American Medical Association : The predominant association of physicians, founded in 1847, that has represented the interests and concerns of doctors. For most of its history, it has vigorously opposed the establishment of a national health care system such as those found in most other countries.
analytical sociology : An approach to social theory and research that centers on “middle-range” questions and seeks to uncover the processes, or mechanisms, through which individuals are influenced by social forces.
animism : The belief that a supernatural power organizes all plants, inanimate objects, and natural phenomena and that the universe itself along with all of these objects has a soul or spiritual essence.
anthropocentrism : The belief that humans are separate from and superior to the natural world.
assembly line : A type of factory in which each worker performs one or a handful of small, discrete tasks, with a conveyer belt moving pieces to each workstation. A finished product results from the input of many workers across an entire factory.
assimilation : The process by which immigrants come to be incorporated into their new society by taking on the cultural tastes and practices of the new society.
association : The existence of a relationship between two variables, where a change in one variable is related to a change in another variable.
asylum status : A form of protection available to immigrants seeking admission to another country because of political violence or repression in their home country. Typically, applicants seeking asylum status must demonstrate that their life would be in danger if they were forced to return to their home country.
atheist : A term used to describe anyone who actively rejects the possibility of a god or any other supernatural being.
authority : The ability to compel others to do things without needing to resort to threats. For Max Weber, authority requires legitimacy; that is, individuals grant authority to those they believe have a legitimate right to rule.
autonomy : In work, the power to decide what and how one performs one’s daily tasks, free of close supervision.
baby boom : The post–World War II period in the United States from approximately 1946 through 1964. During this period, fertility was high. The birth cohorts born during the baby boom years produced a generation of Americans that was the largest in U.S. history.
biographical availability : An individual’s freedom to participate in a movement or protest due to a (relative) lack of constraining obligations created by work, school, family, or community.
birth cohort : A group of individuals in a population born within a given time period. Thus the 1995–1999 birth cohort refers to those born between 1995 and 1999.
bourgeoisie : The group in a capitalist economy who own businesses and employ people to work for them. This term is used in the Marxist tradition to refer to the most powerful class in a capitalist society.
Bracero Program : A set of agreements between the United States and Mexico from 1942 to 1964 to import temporary workers from Mexico.
brain drain : The departure of a significant number of the most educated and skilled citizens, who go to live and work in other countries.
bureaucracy : A type of organization that has rules and responsibilities for each position (or job) spelled out, in which selection into those positions occurs on the basis of merit (not typically by election or inheritance). Many bureaucracies are also responsible for setting out policies and procedures that are to be adhered to by others.
cap-and-trade program : A system in which a limit is placed on the total amount of carbon emissions that are allowable (the cap) and in which businesses buy and sell permits that entitle them to a designated amount of emissions (the trade).
capital : A resource that can be used to make investments. Economic capital refers to the possession of financial assets that can be invested in a business. Other types of capital have also been suggested, for example human capital (the skills, education, or knowledge an individual possesses, which can be used to earn higher income) and cultural capital (the cultural knowledge possessed by an individual which impacts an individual’s capacity to speak and interact with others in a sophisticated way).
capital controls : Government policies that limit the movement of capital (i.e., funds available for investment) into or out of a country.
capitalism : An economic system organized around private property and market exchange. In a capitalist economy, goods that are produced for consumption are distributed via exchange on the market.
capitalist economy : An economic system in which goods and services are exchanged through markets, in which prices are established by what buyers are willing to pay, and in which property is privately owned. Under capitalism, markets extend to the hiring of workers at wages determined by negotiations between individuals (or unions) and employers. The role of government in regulating a capitalist economy varies widely, producing different types of capitalist economies around the world today.
capitalist state : The governing institutions and legal system in a capitalist society.
capitalist world system : A concept invented by Immanuel Wallerstein to describe the ways in which capitalist economies are linked in a global system, in which rich, developed countries are able to exploit undeveloped countries through a global division of labor in which poor countries provide raw materials and lower-skill labor.
care work : All types of caring for other people, typically in one’s own family, including childcare, elder care, or taking care of a disabled or sick adult.
caste society : A society in which a person’s social position is determined by the family he or she is born into.
causal inference : A statement about cause and effect that claims that a change in one variable is the cause of a change in another variable.
causality : When change in one variable is a direct cause of change in another variable. For example, long-term smoking is established as a cause of increased risk of lung cancer.
census : A count of the members of a current population.
central planning : An economy in which governments plan the amount of goods to be produced and their price for consumers. Central planning was commonly practiced in communist countries in the twentieth century, such as the Soviet Union, China, and countries in Eastern Europe.
charisma : Derived from a Greek word meaning “gift of grace,” Weber introduced the idea of charisma into the sociological study of social change to refer to unique individuals who claim special powers or gifts that their followers believe to be true.
chronic disease (or chronic health condition) : A health condition that is long lasting, including heart disease, cancer, arthritis, diabetes, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
chronic disease prevalence : The total number of cases of a particular disease in a population, or the proportion of disease cases compared to the population as a whole.
civil inattention : The act of ignoring other people to an appropriate degree even while noticing that other people are present.
civil religion : The sacred beliefs, practices, and symbols associated with a particular nation-state or community, which may or may not contain elements of a traditional organized religion.
class : The sociological concept that refers to a group of people who share a similar social and economic position in society.
class analysis : The study of society focused on class or changes in the system of class inequality. Emphasis is placed on examining how, when, and where people’s actions and beliefs are influenced by their economic position.
class reproduction : The processes that cause class boundaries and distinctions to be maintained over time.
class struggle : The idea that classes of people who are treated differently by the economic system are inevitably going to be in conflict with one another.
climate change : The variety of changes in weather patterns that warming temperatures are producing.
code of ethics : A set of guidelines that outlines what is considered moral and acceptable behavior in some context (such as within an organization or profession).
coercive isomorphism : Similarities between organizations that arise out of legal or other requirements. Organizations become similar because they have no choice.
cohabitation : The act of an unmarried straight or gay couple living together.
collective identity : One’s belief that one belongs to a certain group (or groups) with distinctive characteristics and interests (for example, women, the working class, or socialists). Not all such identities come easily to people; they may have to be consciously created, which is one of the things that some movements do.
college wage premium : Related to when people with less than a college degree have seen their earnings decline or have increasing trouble finding good jobs.
community : A group of individuals who interact with and often support each other on the basis of a shared aspect of personal identity. Communities of people often live in close proximity, but the term can apply to communities linked in other ways.
comparative–historical research : A method of research that examines differences across countries or in different historical periods to try to understand what factors cause some specific change to occur.
concentration of poverty : When a geographically bounded area experiences extremely high rates of economic disadvantage leading to higher rates of social problems.
conflict theory : A type of social theory that emerged out of dissatisfaction with structural functionalism and held that all societies are characterized by conflicts that arise from the uneven distribution of power and wealth between groups.
congregation : A specific religious body that meets regularly.
conjugal family : A family consisting of a relatively autonomous married couple (and their children) able to seek its fortune outside the parental household.
conservationist : One who argues that the point of environmental protection ought to be to responsibly manage natural resources so that they are available for commercial use by future generations.
constructivism : The view that social categories such as race or gender are social creations, not biological facts.
consumption : The act of purchasing and using goods and services.
conurb : A geographically continuous urban area that stretches across city political boundaries.
correlation : The existence of a relationship between two variables. A correlation exists when a change in one variable is related to a change in another variable. It does not necessarily imply, however, that the change in one variable is the cause of the change in the other. Correlation can be contrasted with causality.
counterculture : A group whose ideas, attitudes, and behaviors are in direct conflict with mainstream culture.
counterpublic : Alternative public organizations created by disadvantaged social groups.
counterterrorism : Measures undertaken to fight or combat terrorist organizations, including military strikes and surveillance of suspected terrorist groups.
credentialism : A requirement that one must obtain certain specific degrees or certificates before he or she can be considered for a particular job.
criminal justice system : The entire body of laws and institutions that regulate and punish criminal activity. This includes written laws, courts, and other organizations where guilt or innocence is determined, as well as the places (such as jails and prisons, but also probation and parole offices) where those who have been convicted of a criminal offense are supervised.
cross-national comparison : Research that focuses on explaining the differences between countries, such as understanding why some outcome is observed in one country and not another.
cross-sectional : Research based on data that is collected at one point in time.
cultural capital : The type and level of education and cultural knowledge possessed by an individual. Having a high level of cultural capital signifies one’s high status in the eyes of others.
cultural omnivore : A cultural elite that demonstrates high status through a broad range of cultural consumption and knowledge, including low-status culture.
cultural relativism : The idea that cultural meanings and practices must be evaluated in their own social contexts.
cultural universal : A cultural trait common to all humans and societies.
culture : Systems of belief and knowledge shared by members of a group or society that shape individual and group behavior and attitudes. A society’s culture includes its language, customs, symbols, rituals, and other forms of meaning that are widely shared.
culture industry : The production for profit of popular music, movies, books, television, social media, and other types of mass-culture products by capitalist enterprises.
culture wars : Disagreements about the proper role of family and religious values in society.
curriculum : The structure of coursework and content of a sequence of courses making up a program of study in a school or school system.
data analysis : The scientific process by which researchers interpret the data they have collected.
data coding : The organization of data based on key concepts and categories.
data display : A visual projection of patterns in data, for example as tables or figures.
deglobalization : Periods of history when economic trade and investment between countries declines.
deindustrialization : A steady decline in industrial or manufacturing jobs.
deism : Belief in the existence of a supernatural or supreme being, but rejection of the view that this supreme being actively intervenes in human affairs.
democracy : A concept with multiple meanings, all of which concern the ability of ordinary people to exert direct control over their leaders. As form of governance in the modern world, democracy can be said to exist where leaders are chosen in free elections where anyone can run and the news media are freely allowed to discuss the issues and candidates. Broader conceptions of democracy incorporate a more direct role for citizen participation where everyone has the right to participate and equal resources to do so.
demographer : One who studies population issues, particularly in relation to fertility, mortality, and migration, and how these processes vary among individuals in a population.
demography : The study of population size, particularly in relation to fertility rates (the ratio of live births in a population), mortality (the ratio of deaths and the life expectancy of individuals), and migration across borders.
denomination : An organized branch of a larger religious tradition.
dependent variable : A variable that fluctuates in relation to other (“independent”) variables. In research, the dependent variable is the object of explanation, or what the researcher is trying to explain.
deportation : The act of sending immigrants back to their country of origin.
deskilling : The process of breaking down the tasks involved in the production of goods or services into parts that can be done by someone without specialized training.
determinist : One who believes that a society’s environment, or the technology it has developed to exploit its environment, determines everything else—from its social structure to individuals’ thoughts.
deterrence : Policies or laws that are designed to discourage an individual or group from engaging in some kind of behavior.
deviant : An individual whose actions or attitudes fall outside the generally accepted norms of a given group or society. What is “deviant” behavior is subject to change, depending on which group(s) have the power to define what is “normal.”
diaspora : A group of people dispersed from their original homeland and settled in other areas for long periods of time who nonetheless retain cultural practices, memories, and ties to that space.
digital divide : The social, economic, and cultural gap between those with effective access to information technology and those without such access.
discrimination : Any behavior, practice, or policy that harms, excludes, or disadvantages individuals on the basis of their group membership. Discrimination is often used by dominant groups to control opportunities and reduce the challenges from subordinate groups.
division of labor : The specialization of individuals in any organization or group, or in society as a whole, particularly in relation to work. There is thus a division of labor in all of society (with different people working in different occupations), a division of labor in individual organizations (where different people perform different tasks) and a division of labor in individual families and communities.
doctrine : The official beliefs and rules of a particular religion or social and political group. Most commonly used to refer to more rigid belief systems.
double standard of sexuality : Judging women more harshly than men for having sex outside of marriage or outside of relationships.
ecology : The branch of science that studies the relationship between organisms and their environment.
economic restructuring : Changes in the way the economy, firms, and employment relations are organized.
edge city : A concentrated area of business, shopping, and entertainment just outside of the historical urban centers of commerce. Edge cities differ from classic suburbs in having a considerable amount of land devoted to economic activities, not just residences.
educational homogamy : The practice of people marrying individuals with educational levels similar to their own.
egalitarian : A society, organization, or group characterized by having little or very low levels of inequality.
egalitarian relationship : A relationship where all members of the relationship share more or less equally in performing required tasks. In the case of intimate relationships, this includes sharing household chores, including child or elder care.
emigration : The act of leaving one’s country of birth to move to a new country.
emigration and immigration policies : Government policies regulating the right of people to move into or out of a country.
empirical generalizability : The application of conclusions from findings about one group or setting to the larger population. An empirical research result is generalizable when the same result can be found in another context.
entrepreneur : One who invests money in a business.
enumerate : Systematically count (as in counting population).
environmental justice : The achievement of equal protection from environmental hazards for all people, regardless of race, class, or geography; environmental justice also means giving community members a voice in shaping decisions that affect their environment and their health.
environmental racism : A concept that describes how poor people of color disproportionately bear the burden of environmental hazards.
environmental sociology : The study of how society simultaneously shapes and is shaped by the physical environment.
epidemiological transition : The transition of a population from health conditions primarily involving infectious disease to health conditions primarily involving chronic disease.
epidemiology : The study of health-related events in populations, their characteristics, their causes, and their consequences.
essentialism : The view that members of a group share a fundamental, inherited, innate, and fixed quality or characteristic. This outlook presumes that races are natural groupings whose boundaries are determined by deep-seated and unchangeable traits that are found within each individual.
ethnic enclave : A place where people of a particular ethnicity live in high concentration.
ethnicity : A system for classifying people who are believed to share common descent, based on perceived cultural similarities.
ethnocentrism : The inability to understand, accept, or reference patterns of behavior or belief different from one’s own.
ethnographer : A sociologist who enters the everyday lives of those he or she studies in hopes of understanding how they navigate and give meaning to their worlds.
ethnography : A qualitative research method for studying the way of life of a group of people by close observation of them over a relatively long period of time.
ethnomethodology : A line of sociological inquiry (introduced by Harold Garfinkel) that studies the ways (tools and methods) members of a particular group construct social order and make sense of their everyday lives.
evangelical : Someone who believes in salvation through personal conversion (or being “born again”). Evangelicals are also known for their emphasis on bringing their beliefs to others. The term is mostly associated with Christianity, although it can apply to someone of other faiths as well.
export : Goods or services that are sold outside the country in which they are produced.
extended case method : A method of conducting ethnography that emphasizes the contribution of research to social theory. An ethnographer using the extended case method starts from a theoretical problem or puzzle.
factors of production : The inputs—such as land, labor, capital, and technology—that go into the production of any good or service.
fad : Any kind of behavior that spreads (often rapidly) among a specific population and is repeated enthusiastically for some period of time before disappearing (often rapidly).
family values : A term generally associated with views and ideas about the family that highlight the virtues of heterosexual marriage and childrearing in a traditional nuclear family with defined gender roles. Family values can also be applied to other kinds of nontraditional unions.
fee for service : A system of payment to doctors in which they are paid based on the number of exams and procedures they perform, rather than receiving a salary.
feminist movement : A social movement whose members advocate equality between men and women in rights and opportunities.
feminist social theory : Social theories which place gender relations and male domination at the center of their conceptualization of societies.
fertility : The process by which members of a population produce live births.
feudalism : A social order in which those who own land (landlords) are entitled to receive the products of the laborers (serfs) who are legally obligated to work for the landowner.
first demographic transition : The transition by a country or region from a pretransition period of high fertility and high mortality, to a mid-transition period of declining mortality followed by declining fertility, to a posttransition period in which both mortality and fertility are low.
first immigration era : The period before 1875, in which immigration into the United States was essentially unregulated by the U.S. government.
Flexner Report : A report on medical education issued in 1910 under the auspices of the Carnegie Foundation that concluded most existing medical schools failed to train their students in modern science and laboratory practices. Led to a huge reorganization of medical school education, with nearly half of existing schools closing or merging in response to the report.
forces of production : One part of the modes of production; the technological and productive capacity of any society at a given point in time.
foreign direct investment (FDI) : A type of investment by a company in one country to produce goods or services in another. This could involve the purchase of an existing business in the second country or by building factories and/or offices in the second country and hiring workers.
foreign investment : Investment of capital from one country into another.
foreign-born citizen : An immigrant who has obtained citizenship in his or her new country.
fossil fuel : An energy source, such as coal, oil, or natural gas, that is made of fossils that decomposed over millions of years under high pressure.
fourth immigration era : In the period since 1965 in the United States, allowable immigration has been subject to a series of restrictions on immigration from both the Eastern and Western Hemispheres but without specific national origins quotas.
framing : The specific ways in which ideas and beliefs are presented to other people. Politicians, political activists, and social movements all engage in framing efforts when they try to persuade others that their way of thinking is correct. Scholars of social movements have also focused on how activists try to frame or present their cause or ideas for change so that they make sense to or resonate with the beliefs of potential recruits and supporters.
free space : Place where people gather that do not have any government or corporate surveillance, where oppositional ideas and tactics can develop and spread.
fundamental social cause : A theory stating that individuals of higher socioeconomic status have access to knowledge, money, power, and social connections that are deployed throughout the life course to avoid disease and death. These resources can be deployed in a range of situations. As a result, this theory predicts that no matter what the causes of bad health, socioeconomic inequalities will inevitably emerge.
gender : The ways that social forces create differences between men’s and women’s behavior, preferences, treatment, and opportunities, and the characteristics of men and women that reflect these forces.
General Social Survey : A biennial survey of American society since 1972 covering a wide range of social, demographic, and attitudinal questions.
generalization : Forming conclusions about broader society from research on a subgroup or sample of the broader society.
generalized other : The social control exercised by commonsense understandings of what is appropriate given a specific time and place.
Geneva Conventions : A set of international agreements between countries about how prisoners of war are to be treated.
genocide : The deliberate and systematic killing of a category of people.
gentrification : The process that occurs when neighborhoods undergo a process of change where new investment, new people, and new establishments move into and alter the character of the neighborhood.
ghetto : A poor, isolated neighborhood, often formed as the result of residential segregation in which members of a poor or low-status racial, ethnic, or religious group are compelled to live in the same place.
glass ceiling : A term used to describe the limitations on the advancement of women in corporations, suggesting that even as firms begin to hire large numbers of women they are failing to promote them into positions of power and authority.
global city : A city that contains a disproportionate amount of global business activity, particularly when connected by international finance, trade, culture, and communication to other cities around the world. Because it acts as a node at the center of global economic activity, global cities are places in which trade and investment are facilitated.
global neighborhood : A diverse neighborhood made up of people from several different national and ethnic groups.
global value chain : The full range of activities that businesses and workers provide at each stage of the production of a good or service that add to its value. While a value chain can be entirely within a single company, or contained with one country, increasingly global value chains (with production inputs from more than one country) are being found.
global warming : Describes the rising of Earth’s average temperature.
globalization : The growing permeability of national borders and the increase in flows of goods, services, and people across national borders.
Great Migration : The move of African Americans from the rural South to the industrial North in the first half of the twentieth century.
green card : A term used to describe a visa status for an immigrant to the United States that allows its holder to live in the United States permanently but does not make that immigrant a citizen.
greenhouse effect : The result of high levels of CO2 in the atmosphere allowing the sun’s heat to pass through to the Earth’s surface while stopping it from spreading back into space.
gross domestic product (GDP) : The total value of all goods and services, plus investment and government expenditures, that a country produces.
group style : The set of norms and practices that distinguishes one group from another.
growth machine : A coalition of business interests and city boosters who work together with local governments to attract residents and economic investment to a particular area.
guerilla warfare : A type of warfare in which an outmanned army hides from its larger opponent and engages in attacks only in situations where it thinks it can gain an advantage.
habitus : A concept introduced by sociologist Pierre Bourdieu to refer to the diverse ways in which individuals develop intuitive understandings and engrained habits reflecting their class background and upbringing.
Hawthorne studies : An influential series of studies at the Hawthorne plant of the Western Electric company in the 1920s. Two major findings emerged from these studies: (1) the experiment effect, which is any change interpreted by workers as management’s attempt to improve conditions, especially those that provide mental stimulation, improve workers, productivity; and (2) the social group effect, in which workers moved to separate spaces as a group develop bonds that increase their productivity.
health disparity : A difference in health status linked to social, economic, or environmental conditions including socioeconomic status, race and ethnicity, gender, and geographic location.
healthy life expectancy : The average number of healthy years one can expect to live if current patterns of death and illness remain the same.
hegemony : Widely shared beliefs about what is right or wrong that legitimize and empower a society’s elites.
heteronormativity : A type of prejudice that claims that being heterosexual is the only normal option for an individuals’ sexual orientation.
heterosexism : Discrimination or bias against persons because they are not heterosexual.
hidden curriculum : The often unstated standards of behavior that teachers and administrators expect from children within the education system. These often unstated expectations may reflect the middle-class biases and norms of school professionals.
homelessness : An extreme form of poverty defined by lack of permanent shelter to live in.
homeopathy : A medical sect, originally from Germany, that emphasized the use of small amounts of a drug known to cause a health condition in large doses to treat that very same health condition when it manifests itself in an individual.
homophobia : Discrimination or bias against homosexual persons that is based in fear.
hookup : Sexual behavior (not always intercourse) that occurs in a situation that was not a prearranged date and between individuals who may or may not be interested in an exclusive romantic relationship.
hospice care : The treatment of people with incurable diseases in the final stage of life. The goal of hospice care is to attempt to help patients live as pain-free as possible in their final days.
human capital : The stock of experience, knowledge, skills, and habits which an individual has that they can use to do productive labor.
hypothesis : A prediction researchers make that they will test in their research.
identity : The social characteristics and group affiliations an individual has.
ideology : A set of ideas that constitutes one’s goals, expectations, and actions.
illegal immigration : Undocumented immigration.
immigration : A term that describes the movement of people across borders.
immobility : A situation in which individuals are unable to move from one economic or social class into another. Usually immobility means that people remain in the same social and economic situation that they are born into (in other words, in the same class or income group as their parents).
implicit prejudice or bias : Prejudice based on stereotypes that can be activated without an individual’s being consciously aware of holding them.
import : A good or service purchased in one country but manufactured in another.
import-substituting industrialization (ISI) : Government policies that attempt to replace imported goods with similar goods produced by domestic companies. Examples of such policies include putting very high taxes on certain imported goods or barring them altogether. ISI was a strategy used by many poor and moderate-income developing countries in the twentieth century in an attempt to foster domestic economic growth.
in-depth interview : A method of collecting data based on asking a person a set of questions and having a conversation with him or her focused on gathering information related to the research.
incarceration : The holding of an individual in a jail or prison.
income : The receipt of money or goods over a particular accounting period (such as hourly, weekly, monthly, or yearly). Income may include wages from a job, benefits from a pension or government program, or income from investments.
independent variable : A factor that might help to explain some outcome of interest. An example might be the impact of educational level—in this case, the independent variable—on one’s income as an adult.
individual discrimination : Action carried out by an individual or small group that harms, excludes, or disadvantages members of a certain group.
Industrial Revolution : The period in which mass production in factories began to develop and fostered rapid economic growth. The timing of the Industrial Revolution varied from country to country but is generally thought to have begun in the late eighteenth century and evolved throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
industrialization : A process of economic change characterized by the decline of farming and the growth of factories and large-scale goods production.
inequality : The unequal distribution of valued goods and opportunities in society.
inequality of opportunity : The ways in which inequality shapes the opportunities for children and young adults to maximize their potential.
infant mortality rate : A measure of infant mortality, defined as the number of deaths per 1,000 live births in a given calendar year, with the number of deaths referring to babies who die during their first 12 months of life.
infectious disease : A disease caused by the entrance, presence, or growth of a microorganism or other foreign agent inside the body.
information asymmetry : A situation that occurs when one party to a transaction is unable to obtain the information necessary to evaluate the other side’s offer in any transaction. In the case of medicine, patients usually have no way of learning in advance how much different procedures might cost or which doctor offers the best service at a reasonable cost.
informed consent : The voluntary participation of someone in a research project or medical treatment based on the participant/patient having a full understanding of possible risks and benefits involved.
institution : 
institutional (or structural) discrimination : Occurs when the actions or policies of organizations or social institutions exclude, disadvantage, or harm members of particular groups. Such discrimination need not be intentional, and in practice it is often hard to discern whether or not discriminatory intentions lay behind a particular policy or practice.
institutional review board (IRB) : Required at all universities that receive federal funds for research, these boards review researchers’ proposals before any work can begin in order to assess the potential harm of the research for participants being studied.
institutionalization : The process by which a social practice or organization begins to become an institution; the introduction of formal roles and rules in an organized form.
interdisciplinary research : A method of research that integrates ideas, theories, and data from different academic fields.
interest group : An organization established to promote the interests of a group or corporation, especially in Congress or at the level of state governments.
intermarriage : Marriage between people in different social groups.
interpretative sociology : The study of the meanings individuals ascribe to their actions.
intersectionality : Forms of inequality that overlap and potentially reinforce one another. One’s class, race, ethnicity, religion, gender, sexuality, or other characteristics may create multiple forms of disadvantage that inequality researchers should consider.
intersex individual : A person who is born with a body that has some biological characteristics typically found in only male bodies, as well as other biological characteristics typically found in female bodies (for example, a penis and ovaries).
irreligion : The absence of religion.
jail : A place of detention where individuals are held either before trial or serve relatively minor sentences. Prisons generally hold offenders convicted of more serious crimes.
journalism : The production and dissemination of information about contemporary affairs of general importance.
kin : Other people that individuals have important social relationships with. These important others often include immediate (and sometimes extended) family members but also can include close friends and even other acquaintances who play an important (and sometimes supportive) role in one’s life.
kinship system : The social links and boundaries, defined by biology and social custom, that establish who is related to whom.
labeling theory : A theory of deviance that stresses that many kinds of behaviors are deviant solely because they are labeled as such.
labor market : The process through which employers identify and hire individuals to work under specified terms of employment.
labor process : The organization of work, in terms of the relationship between workers and employers, the way specific work tasks are structured and performed, and the technologies and organizational environments in which the work is performed.
language : Refers to any comprehensive system of words or symbols representing concepts, and it does not necessarily need to be spoken, as the hundreds of.
lean production : A term used to describe the efforts of economic organizations in recent years to achieve more efficiency by constantly scrutinizing and reducing costs in every possible way.
legal permanent resident (LPR) : One who is allowed to live permanently in a country even though he or she is not a citizen. In the United States, such a person would hold a green card.
legal temporary resident : A person allowed to live in a country for a specified period of time.
legitimacy : The acceptance of the authority of a ruler and/or system of government. Legitimacy exists when virtually all members of society accept the right of their rulers to govern their society.
liberation theology : A strain of theology first associated with Latin American Catholicism that emphasizes god’s concern for the poor and downtrodden and the rightness of social justice causes.
life chances : An individual’s long-term possibilities and potential, including future income and opportunities, given his or her current attributes such as level of education, social networks, and possession of marketable skills or assets. Members of the same class are generally said to have similar life chances.
life course : The transitions individuals make as they age through their lives. A typical life course includes childhood, adolescence, the transition to adulthood and first job, perhaps becoming a parent, retiring, and death. The study of the life course by sociologists centers on the key transitions, or turning points, in individual lives and the larger social patterns they represent.
life expectancy (at age x) : The average number of additional years (past age x) that the average person in a population can expect to live.
life-course perspective : A model that highlights the effects that social contexts a person inhabits throughout life have on his or her health.
longitudinal research : Research based on data collected over a long period of time.
looking-glass self : A term coined by sociologist Charles Horton Cooley to emphasize the extent to which our own self-understandings are dependent on how others view us.
loose coupling : An organizational environment in which those at the top do not have control over the activities and decisions underneath them. This often arises in complex organizations with multiple units.
lynching : The killing of someone by a group, without a trial or due process, for some specified behavior.
mainstream culture : The most widely shared systems of meaning in a society. Mainstream culture includes the most widely consumed cultural products (music, literature, films), foods, and ways of speaking and widely shared ideas about normal or appropriate behavior.
malpractice : In medicine, an improper or negligent type of treatment of patient that causes harm to the patient.
market : Any setting in which buyers and sellers engage in exchange.
mass communication : Communication within society as a whole through the mass media (television, Internet, newspapers, radio), as opposed to between individuals.
mass incarceration : A term used to describe a situation in which a very high proportion of people are held in prisons. It has been used to describe developments in the American criminal justice system over the past 30 years.
mean : A statistical term that refers to the average value of a set of data. Add all values and then divide the total by the number of values used.
mechanical solidarity : According to Emile Durkheim, mechanical solidarity refers to the factors that hold primitive societies together, mostly through family and kinship ties and a collective consciousness shared by all members of the community.
mechanism : The specific factor or factors that cause something to happen or produce some outcome.
median : A statistical term that refers to the value that lies at the middle (or midpoint) of all the data, with an equal number of cases with either higher or lower values.
Medicaid : A federally funded, state-administered program that provides health insurance to poor families and poor children,
medical board : Each state has established a board to review physicians and hospitals. These boards are usually made up of people from the medical field: physicians, hospital administrators, nurses, public health officials, academics, and representatives from various medical companies. Members of the public are now usually included as well.
medicalization : The process by which some human condition comes to be defined as a medical condition, one that can be treated using medicine.
Medicare : A federal government program in the United States that provides health insurance to all individuals over 65 years of age.
megachurch : Individual (and often independent) Protestant churches which average over 2,000 people in attendance at weekly services.
megacity : A city with a population over 10 million.
megaregion : A geographically continuous urban area containing at least two very large cities and their surrounding towns, which are connected through economic and transportation infrastructure.
metropolitan region : A continuously populated region with several jurisdictions (a large central city surrounded by several smaller towns) that are all physically connected to one another.
middle class : A group of people who occupy the middle positions in terms of income and status in an economic system.
middle-range theory : A theory that makes specific, researchable propositions about particular aspects of society. Middle-range theories can be contrasted with broader or grand theories of society as a whole.
migrant energy : The special skills and determination brought to a country by migrants, who may be especially motivated to succeed.
migrant remittance : The process by which a migrant sends money to family or friends in his or her home country.
migration : The process by which individuals move from one location, region, country, or city to another.
mimetic isomorphism : The tendency of similar organizations to adopt the same kinds of rules and procedures in the belief that what works for one organization should work for others.
minimum wage : Established by law, minimum wage is the lowest hourly wage a worker can be paid.
mixed-method research : Research that uses evidence that is both qualitative and quantitative.
mode of production : In Marxist theory, a mode of production is a concept for characterizing the dominant economic system in a society. A mode of production has two parts, the forces of production and the social relations of production.
moral behavior : Behavior that is guided by a belief about what is right and proper to do.
moral shock : An unexpected event that surprises, distresses, and outrages people, often to the point of motivating them to join or even start a movement to eliminate the source of their outrage.
mortality : The process by which individuals in a population gradually die.
mover : An individual who leaves a place to live in another.
multiculturalism : Beliefs or policies promoting the equal accommodation of different ethnic or cultural groups within a society. It is sometimes also used to refer to the benefits of dialogue and interaction between different groups.
national culture : The set of shared cultural practices and beliefs of people living within a nation-state.
nationalism : A set of beliefs about the virtues of one’s country. In the sociology of race and ethnicity, nationalism includes the assumption that people are inherently members of a specific nation, and that their identities are in large part defined by their national membership.
natural selection : In evolutionary biology, a theory of how species evolve that emphasizes the process through which biological traits become more or less common depending on whether they enhance the survival of the species.
naturalization : The process of becoming a citizen in a new country.
neo-Marxism : An updated form of Marxism, neo-Marxism contends that the capitalist state could, and indeed often has, forced powerful economic classes to make “concessions” to the working class (thereby improving the living standards of all citizens).
net financial assets (NFA) : The total value of savings, investments, and other convertible assets a person has, minus any debts, and excluding one’s primary home (if it is owned).
network analysis : A research technique that focuses on identifying the connections among individuals, groups, or organizations.
networked public : An online public sphere.
new religious movement : A religious group that emerges independently of existing religious traditions or makes significant revisions and additions to them.
niche : A unique place or opportunity that can be profitably filled by someone or some group. Niches arise in a variety of ways, especially when existing organizations or government agencies fail to meet some underlying social need.
No Child Left Behind : Legislation passed in 2001 which sought reduce the achievement gap between low-income and minority children and higher-income white children.
norm : A basic rule of society that helps us know what is and is not appropriate to do in a situation. Norms evolve over time as social attitudes and expectations change, although those changes are typically very slow.
normalize : To make or declare some action as normal or appropriate.
normative isomorphism : The process of organizations becoming similar because of a widespread belief among their members and the members of similar organizations that they should adopt certain rules or procedures.
nuclear family : A term used to describe a family consisting of a husband and wife and their children.
nurse practitioner (NP) : Nurses with advanced degrees and clinical training to enable independent patient diagnoses and treatment.
occupation : A job that has been formally established and has some requirements (often formalized) for training or knowledge to perform it.
occupational sex segregation : When women and men are distributed differently across occupations, such that some jobs are filled mostly by men and others mostly by women.
one-drop rule : Enshrined in many state laws in the United States around the turn of the nineteenth century, this method of racial classification defined any individual with any African ancestry as black. From this viewpoint someone with one black great-grandparent and seven white great-grandparents is considered black because their “drop of black blood” means they have more in common with blacks than with whites.
operationalize : When researchers define the methods and techniques to be used to assess and define the concepts that are being investigated.
organic solidarity : According to Emile Durkheim, as societies become more advanced, they are held together through the mutual dependence and interdependence individuals have with one another.
organization : A social group or social network that is unified by a common institutional structure, such as a government agency, a school, a business firm, the military, a religion, and many others.
organizational isomorphism : The process by which similar organizations adopt similar rules and procedures.
outsourcing : Common in globalization, outsourcing refers to the contracting of parts of the production process to another party, possibly located abroad. A common example in the United States is of credit-card companies hiring people in India to handle customer service calls.
paganism : Religions that generally envision a set of gods and attendants who rule the world.
palliative care : All types of healthcare designed to reduce pain and suffering by helping patients get better. It is often contrasted with hospice care, where there is no hope of curing or improving a patient.
path dependency : The process by which the historical legacies and outcomes of the past impact actors and organizations in the present, making some choices or outcomes appear logical and others illogical.
patient-centered care : Involving the patient in developing a program of care for a medical condition; the patient should be part of the conversation about how to treat the condition.
patriarchy : A gender system in which men have substantially more power than women in politics, the economy, and the family.
patrilocal : A family relationship in which a married couple resides with the husband’s parents.
peasant : A person who works in agriculture but does not own the land he or she farms.
physically and mentally unhealthy days : The number of days people in a given population rated their physical or mental health as “not good.”
pluralism (in religion) : The coexistence of individuals and religious groups with significantly different beliefs and cultures in the same society.
political action committee (PAC) : A term used in U.S. politics to describe an organization set up to collect political donations from individuals, corporations, or unions to influence political and electoral outcomes.
political-process perspective : A theoretical perspective that emphasizes that movements are concerned with politics, not individual psychological states, and are a rational form of politics (“politics by other means”) and a normal response, under certain circumstances, to routine institutional political processes. Movements emerge and may be successful if those political processes create political opportunities for certain kinds of collective protest.
polygamy : The practice of marriage of one individual to two or more other individuals.
polytheistic : Religions that worship more than one entity or god.
population dynamics : The process by which a population changes in size over time.
population momentum : The tendency of a population that has been changing in size to continue to change in size even if factors such as fertility and mortality have shifted to levels that would, in the long run, imply no change in population size.
poverty line : Established by the government, it is the minimum income necessary to afford basic necessities. Anyone below this threshold is considered to be in poverty.
power : Power has three distinct dimensions in the sociological sense: (1) the power of an individual or group to get another individual or group to do something it wants, which sometimes may involve force; (2) the power to control the agenda of issues that are to be decided; and finally (3) the power to persuade others that their interests are the same as those of a powerholder. Power can be possessed by individuals or groups.
precapitalist economy : All of the different types of economies that existed before the rise of capitalism, including those based on hunting or agriculture.
precariat : A new term that combines precariousness with Karl Marx’s term for the working class (the proletariat) to describe the growing number of workers employed in part-time, insecure jobs with low wages and no control over their hours of work or working conditions.
prejudice : Negative beliefs or attitudes held about entire groups based on subjective, selective, or inaccurate information. They lead to “prejudgment” of the individuals associated with stigmatized groups.
preservationist : One who believes that the environment has intrinsic value and should be maintained in as pristine a state as possible.
price convergence : When the prices of goods sold in different places tends toward the same level, adjusted for currency values
principal : In the immigration process, the family member who is applying for the right to live in another country (with his or her family members as secondary applicants) is called the principal.
prison : A place of detention where people convicted of felonies (serious crimes requiring at least one year of detention) are held.
privilege : The ability or right to have special access to opportunities or claims on rewards.
probability sampling : A technique for choosing participants for a research study (i.e., a probability sample) in which each person in the population is assigned a known and likely chance of being selected. Some groups of people can be assigned different probabilities of being selected when the probability sample is stratified based on group membership.
probation : A criminal conviction that does not require a prison or jail sentence. During probation, convicted offenders are subject to regular supervision but are allowed to live in their community.
professionalism : An occupation that succeeds in gaining government licensing over the right to practice (and typically leaders of the occupation or professional association control the licensing process), establishes educational requirements to anyone to become eligible for license, and regulates and disciplines members of the profession when necessary.
progressive tax system : A tax system in which tax rates are higher on richer people than poorer people, with the idea being that it is fair to ask those who can afford to pay more to do so. These systems can be based on a progressive income tax and can also differentially assess taxes on wealth transfers, such as inheritances.
Prohibition : The period from 1920 to 1933 in which the consumption or sale of alcohol was barred by a Constitutional amendment (repealed in 1933).
proletariat : Individuals in capitalist economies who work in exchange for pay. The term is usually reserved for people performing manual jobs and is synonymous with “working class.”
proportional representation (PR) : A system of elections in which seats in a legislature are divided up based on the percentage of the vote received. In many PR systems, there is a minimum threshold, such as 5 percent, for a party to cross before it receives seats.
Protestant ethic : The belief that hard work and thrift are signs of god’s grace.
psychoanalysis : The study of the conscious and unconscious aspects of the mind and their influence on individual behavior.
public health : Public policies that aim to reduce the spread of disease and ill health among entire populations by means such as improved sanitation and garbage handling, maintaining clean water, monitoring airborne diseases, and fighting the outbreak of viruses.
public opinion : The views of citizens in the aggregate on social and political topics. Public opinion is usually measured through opinion polls and surveys, where modern sampling techniques allow researchers to estimate opinions by asking a smaller representative group of citizens.
public policy : All of the policies adopted or implemented by the government. A distinction between foreign policy and domestic policy is important, with the former including all policies relating to foreign governments and national security issues, while the latter refers to all of the policies and programs that aim to address social problems or issues inside the country.
public sphere : A social space—physical, virtual, or theoretical—where private citizens can come together as a public body to discuss and express opinions about matters of general interest.
pull factor : In the immigration context, when an individual’s motivation to move to another country is based on the perceived attractions of life in the new country.
purchasing cooperatives : A group of individuals or organizations that band together to be able to negotiate better prices. Under the Affordable Care Act, these groups organized at the state level, attempt to negotiate affordable rates for individuals seeking to buy health insurance.
push factor : When an individual decides to leave a country because of something that is making her or him unhappy (such as low pay, lack of jobs, limited opportunities, or political or religious persecution).
qualitative research : Research that relies on nonnumerical data, such as words, observations, or pictures.
quantitative research : Research that relies on statistical analysis of numerical or categorical data.
race : A system for classifying people who are believed to share common descent, based on perceived innate physical similarities.
racism : Prejudice and/or discrimination against individuals who are members or particular racial or ethnic groups, often drawing on negative stereotypes about the group. Institutional racism refers to rules and regulations that organizations adopt that significantly harm members of a racial or ethnic group.
random sampling : A technique for choosing participants for a research study in which each person in the population of interest has an equal chance of being chosen so that the sample mirrors a larger population and reflects its characteristics or dynamics.
random-assignment experiment : A study using a method of assigning participants or groups to receive different treatments that ensures that any posttreatment differences result from the different treatments they received.
rational-choice perspective : A perspective in social and economic theory that emphasizes the centrality of individual decision making based on how individuals think about their well-being and how best to advance it. While there are a variety of different versions of the rational-choice perspective, all emphasize that individual action is the foundation of society and social order.
receiving country : Host or destination countries where migrants go.
redlining : The determination by governments and banks that neighborhoods with high percentages of racial minorities were ineligible for mortgage loans. Redlining has been illegal since the 1970s.
reference group : A set of individuals who share similar preferences or social positions and have influence on an individual or members of a group.
refugee status : A form of protection that may be granted to people who have been persecuted or fear they will be persecuted on account of race, religion, nationality, political opinions, or membership in a particular social group.
rehabilitation : The attempt to reform a convicted offender so that he or she will not commit crimes in the future. Rehabilitation often involves the use of therapies of various kinds, as well as helping an offender develop job and life skills that will help him or her desist from crime in the future.
relative poverty : A term used to define people as poor not by assessing whether their resources are sufficient to obtain basic social necessities but rather by comparing their incomes relative to other people in society.
reliability : The extent to which the same measurement technique in additional studies would end up producing similar results.
religiosity : The importance of religion in an individual’s life.
remittance : Money sent from an individual in one country to an individual (often a family member) in another country.
renewable energy : Sources of energy that are capable of being replaced by natural ecological cycles, such as wind, sunlight, and water.
replacement fertility : A level of fertility in which individuals in a population, on average have a sufficient number of offspring that will imply, over the long run, no change in the size of the population.
replicated : A study that has been repeated to make sure its results are correct.
representative sample : A small group of people, ideally selected at random, who are similar to the entire population.
research memo : An extended version of research notes, usually organized analytically, that allows researchers to work through their findings and the evidence they have to support them.
resource-mobilization approach : A theoretical perspective that emphasizes the importance of resources, like labor and money, for generating and sustaining social movements. The more resources a movement is able to employ or mobilize, the more successful it is likely to be.
respondent : A person participating in a study who can be asked specific questions of interest to the investigator.
retribution : Punishment that aims at making a criminal offender experience as much harm as he or she has caused others.
revolution : A revolution consists, at minimum, of a change of government or political regime brought about, at least in part, by popular protest. Some define revolutions (or “social revolutions”) more narrowly, as entailing not only a change of regime but also a fundamental change in a society’s economic institutions and class structure.
revolutionary movement : A social movement that seeks to overthrow a government or fundamentally change a society’s economic institutions and class structure.
revolutionary situation : A situation that occurs when two or more political institutions or groups claim to be the rightful or legitimate rulers of a certain territory or population. Such a situation is also called “dual power” or “multiple sovereignty.”
riot : A spontaneous, unplanned collective protest, loosely organized at best, involving attacks on property and (sometimes) persons.
role : A position within an institution or organization that comes with specific social expectations for how to behave and be treated. Some roles may be ascribed, that is, assigned to us by birth (man, woman, white, black), and some may be achieved, that is, acquired through our actions (doctor, professor, class clown).
role conflict : When two or more discordant demands are placed on individuals, rendering them unable to fulfill their own or others, expectations.
role model : A specific individual who exhibits significant influence on others and acts as a reference for how to act.
rural : An area not adjacent to an urban area that has low population density.
sacred : Holy; worthy of special reverence.
same-sex marriage : A marriage between two partners of the same sex.
sample : A technique to define what or whom to include in a study.
sanction : Any type of punishment, including both formal punishment (based on laws or written rules) and informal types of punishments.
scientific management : A movement that arose in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries that attempted to improve productivity by ensuring that managers controlled all aspects of the labor process and would utilize the best practices available given existing technology and knowledge.
scientific method : A step-by-step process of conducting research that begins with formulating a research hypothesis, then operationalizing variables, then collecting data, and finally drawing empirical and conceptual generalizations from the data.
second demographic transition : Some scholars have argued that rich countries are now going through a new demographic transition in which fertility rates have fallen below replacement levels, a multitude of living arrangements other than marriage are emerging, and there is an increasing disconnection between marriage and procreation. Declining fertility combined with increased longevity means that populations are getting older. Finally, many societies are becoming multi-ethnic because of increased levels of immigration to stem population decline.
second generation : The children of immigrants.
second immigration era : The period between 1875 and 1920, in which the United States made its first attempts to establish some restrictions on immigration. This era included restrictions on immigrants from China, those who were sick or impoverished, those lacking literacy, and other such restrictions.
second shift : A term created and popularized by Arlie Hochschild to refer to housework, childcare, and elder care disproportionally done by women. The first shift refers to one’s paid job, whereas the second shift refers to the labor needed to keep households going.
secularization : A process of declining influence or marginalization of religion in society.
secularization hypothesis : A theory that as societies modernize and citizens become better educated, religion will inevitably decline.
segmented assimilation : The various pathways by which immigrant groups become part of the larger social fabric; instead of the pattern where the children of immigrants are economically upwardly mobile and their ethnic difference dissipates with future generations, new forms of assimilation include economic instability and continuing traditional ethnic practices.
segregation : The spatial separation of the population based on race or ethnicity.
self : The conscious being, personified in a human body, which is made and reformulated through social interaction.
self-fulfilling prophecy : A term coined by Robert Merton to mean the process by which someone is defined in a particular way and then comes to fulfill the expectations of that definition.
self-selected : When individuals have the opportunity to choose to be in some condition, those making that choice may be different than those who do not make that choice. The “selection effect” reflects the differences between those two groups.
sending country : The country migrants were born in.
serf : Under feudalism, a person who is legally obligated to work for the landowner.
serial relationships : A pattern of having repeated, short-term intimate relationships with other adults.
sex : Whether a person is classified as male or female based on anatomical or chromosomal criteria.
sex differences : Differences that are assumed to exist because of anatomical or chromosomal criteria.
sexual minority : A group whose sexual behavior or attractions are unusual in a given society. Those who are homosexual, bisexual, or transgendered are sexual minorities.
sexual orientation : Whether one’s sexual attractions are to members of the same sex, the other sex, or both.
significant other : A term coined by George Herbert Mead to mean individuals close enough to us to have a strong capacity to motivate our behavior.
slavery : A social system that denies some individuals all basic rights, allowing these individuals to be owned, controlled, and compelled to work for others.
smog : A smoky air pollutant produced when tailpipe or smokestack emissions that linger in the atmosphere chemically react with the sunlight.
social background : A person’s family or the community where he or she lives and where he or she grew up.
social capital : The resources available to a particular individual through his or her connections to others.
social closure : The process by which organized groups seek to establish or maintain privileged access to rewards or opportunities.
social construct : An invented social phenomenon (for example a belief, discourse, or category) that is shaped by the social forces present in the time and place of its creation.
social construction (of race or gender) : The social processes that create and sustain gender and race differences and inequality.
social construction (of the environment) : The process by which people interpret the natural world and make it meaningful.
social context : The social environments, including economic and cultural conditions, that influence people’s lives.
social control : The institutions, norms, and rules through which societies attempt to shape and control individuals. Behavior that violates social rules is typically punished either formally or informally, reflecting the different ways in which social control is administered.
social distance : A concept first introduced by Georg Simmel to describe how close or intimate, or apart, any two individuals or groups are with each other.
social fact : According to Emile Durkheim, those regularities and rules of everyday life that exist independently and outside the control of individuals.
social forces : All of the forms of social structure (hierarchies and institutions) that any individual must operate within. Social forces are related to what Emile Durkheim called “social facts.”
social group : A collection of individuals formed around some kind of social identity or for some specific purpose.
social hierarchy : Any relationship between individuals or groups that is unequal and provides one person or group with more status and power than another.
social interaction : The way people act together, including how they modify and alter their behavior in response to the presence of others. Social interaction is governed by norms.
social isolation : When an individual has a relative lack of connections to others.
social mobility : The movement of individuals from one social position into another. Intergenerational social mobility is a measure of the extent to which parents and their children have similar or different social and economic positions in adulthood. Upward mobility is said to occur when an individual’s class is higher than that of his or her parents; downward mobility is the opposite.
social movement : A conscious, concerted, and sustained effort by ordinary people to change (or preserve) some aspect of their society by using extrainstitutional means. “Extrainstitutional means” refers to collective actions undertaken outside existing institutions, like courts and legislatures, although movements may also work through such institutions, at least part of the time.
social movement organization (SMO) : A formal organization that participates in, and may initiate or lead, a social movement. SMOs generally pool resources, like labor and money, which may be crucial for movements. Some movements encompass a number of SMOs that alternately cooperate and compete with one another.
social network : The ties or connections between people, groups, and organizations.
social problem : A term used to capture a wide range of individual, group, or societal behaviors or societal issues that are thought to have harmful consequences. Examples might include poverty, crime, drug abuse, homelessness, inequality, racism, sexism, and discrimination.
social relations of production : One part of the modes of production; the relationships and inequalities between different kinds of people within the economy.
social reproduction : The processes that transmit inequality from one generation to the next.
Social Security : In the United States, an umbrella term for legislation passed in 1935 which included pension (income) benefits for retired workers and citizens over 65, which is paid for through taxes on current workers.
social solidarity : The social forces that hold any society together.
social stratification : A subfield of sociology that examines inequalities among individuals and groups.
social structure : The external forces, most notably social hierarchy, norms, and institutions, that provide the context for individual and group action.
social theory : An overarching framework that suggests certain assumptions and assertions about the way the world works. These frameworks are used for posing research questions and evaluating evidence related to those questions.
social ties : The various types of connections individuals make with other people.
socialism : An economic system where the government owns some or most of all productive enterprises and makes decisions about the amount and type of goods and services to be produced.
socialist (mode of production) : In Marxist theory, a socialist mode of production is one in which the productive forces of society are collectively owned (not by individual business owners).
socialization : The process by which individuals come to understand the expectations and norms of their groups as well as the various roles they transition into over the life course and how to behave in society or in particular social settings.
socially deviant : Behavior that violates the written or unwritten rules of society.
society : A large group of people who live in the same area and participate in a common economy or culture.
socioeconomic gradient : Reflects that those with the lowest status are less healthy than those in the middle, who are less healthy than those at the top.
socioeconomic status (SES) : A broad definition of a person’s social class based on components such as education, income, and occupation.
sociological imagination : The capacity to think systematically about how many things we experience as personal problems—for example, debt from student loans, competing demands from divorced parents, or an inability to form a rewarding romantic relationship at college—are really social issues that are widely shared by others born in a similar time and social location as us. It involves taking into account how our individual lives are impacted by historical and social contexts.
sociology : The study of societies and the social worlds that individuals inhabit within them.
soft skills : Also called noncognitive traits, these are social skills—such as knowing how to dress, the ability to hold a sophisticated conversation, or interacting well with a variety of other people—that may enhance a person’s job performance.
spatial concentration : When significant numbers of people from the same group, such as a racial or ethnic group, live in the same physical location, such as a neighborhood or city.
spurious relationship : When two factors seem to move in the same direction but both are themselves caused by something else (i.e., a third factor), sociologists refer to the apparent relationship between the first two factors as a spurious relationship.
state : All of the agencies and offices of governing institutions, including government bureaucracies, law and the legal system, and the military) constitute what sociologists call the state. It is a term that is meant to capture than just the current government in power by incorporating the idea that the there are permanent institutions that are independent of whomever is in power.
state deviance : Deviant behavior by governments or government agencies.
statistically deviant : Behavior that is different or unusual but not necessarily in violation of social norms.
status : A distinct social category that is set off from others and has associated with it a set of expected behaviors and roles for individuals to assume. The category can often involve prestige, such as that accorded to individuals and to important social or economic roles (like “priest,” “lawyer,” “truck driver”). An individual’s status may reflect some accomplishment or position attained, one’s membership in a particular group, or both.
status group : A term invented by Max Weber to describe any group that forms a common identity and develops ways of distinguishing insiders from outsiders.
stayer : One who chooses not to leave.
stereotype : A simplified generalization about a group (e.g., women or men) that is often false or exaggerated. Stereotypes are most often negative, although positive stereotypes can sometimes be found.
stratification system : The full range of social hierarchies found in any society, which create inequalities between individuals and groups.
structural functionalism : A theory of society in which individuals, groups, and the institutions of any society are guided by an overarching social system and can be explained by the needs of society to reproduce itself.
structural individualism : A theory that starts from the proposition that societies rest on the choices and action that individuals make, but in the context of the social forces that shape and constrain individual choice.
structural inertia : The extent to which an organization’s rules and routines are relatively fixed and difficult to change.
stylized facts : A series of facts or empirical regularities that we think we know with great certainty.
subculture : A relatively small group of people whose affiliation is based on shared beliefs, preferences, and practices that distinguish them from the mainstream or larger social group to which they also belong.
suburb : Traditionally, a residential enclave within commuting distance of a city.
suburban sprawl : The continuing geographic spread of sparse residential areas.
supernatural : Attributed to a force or entity beyond scientific understanding and the laws of nature.
survey : A type of research in which information is derived by asking people to answer standardized questions, which may collect information about any aspect of human life of interest to the investigator, including information about jobs, employment, family life, health, education, and policy or political attitudes and values.
sustainability : Refers to a system of development and consumption that satisfies a society’s current needs without imperiling the ability of future generations to do the same.
sweatshop : A workplace that may be characterized by unsafe conditions, very low wages, and harsh working conditions.
symbol : Something that communicates an idea while being distinct from the idea itself.
symbolic boundary : The distinctions people make between themselves and others on the basis of taste, socioeconomic status, morality, or other differences.
symbolic capital : Your reputation.
symbolic interactionism : A theory of the social world that focuses on the meanings that individuals give to objects and social practices and how they use symbolic meanings in their interactions with one another.
syncretic : Combining religious ideas and practices drawn from more than one distinct tradition.
tariff : A tax on goods being imported into a country.
taste : A person’s cultural preferences.
terrorism : A type of warfare in which a weaker group challenges a more powerful group by attacking civilian targets of importance to the more powerful group. State terrorism occurs when a country’s military attacks civilian populations.
theodicy : A justification of the goodness and rightness of god, or more generally of a particular religious system, in the face of the evils of the world.
theology : Discussions and systematic reasoning about god and other religious matters.
theoretical generalizability : The application of conclusions from findings based on a sample or case to larger sociological processes and theories about the world.
theoretical tradition : A conceptual framework or paradigm that sociologists use to imagine and make sense of the world.
thick description : A rich, detailed description of the ways people make sense of their lives.
third immigration era : The period from 1921 to 1965, in which the United States tightly controlled immigration into the United States using strict quotas on entry from different countries.
tool kit : In the sociology of culture, the view that culture is a set of symbolic skills, devices, or strategies that people learn throughout their lives, and can deploy strategically in different situations. The tool kit also supplies a set of ideas to justify a course of action retrospectively.
total fertility rate : A measure of fertility in a given calendar year reflecting the fertility of women at different childbearing ages. A total fertility rate of 3.2 in 2010 in a given population means that the average woman would have 3.2 children during her lifetime, if fertility rates in this population remained the same.
totemism : A belief system in which clans adopt a plant or animal as their group emblem and declare it sacred.
tracking : A term used to describe how schools assign students to distinct groups based on ability or curriculum.
transfer : A term used in immigration research to refer to the transfer of money from an immigrant back home, or to an immigrant from her or his family back home.
transgendered : Individuals who were assigned one sex category at birth based on anatomical criteria but who come to believe they belong in the other gender category and take action to be in the other category.
transnational corporation (TNC) : A company with business operations in multiple countries.
unanticipated consequences of social action : The idea that the outcomes of any action we undertake may well be unanticipated, as for example when we get a dog for companionship but soon make new human friends who take their dogs for exercise at the same park we do.
unauthorized migrant : A person living in a country where he or she is not legally allowed to reside. In current political discussions, these individuals are often referred to as “illegal immigrants.”
union : An organized association of workers created in order to protect and fight for rights or resources for their members. Unions can be organized at a single workplace, across multiple workplaces of the same company or in the same industry.
urban area : A geographic area with a high population density (e.g., 1,000 individuals per square mile).
urban ecology : An approach to the study of cities, social change, and urban life introduced into sociology by the Chicago School to explain how different social groups within cities compete over scarce resources. This competition was thought to promote efficiency and social equilibrium, as distinct sectors of the population adapted to their local environments.
urban ghetto : A section of a city that is characterized by severe racial or ethnic segregation and deep poverty.
urban renewal : The attempt to improve impoverished areas by tearing down existing structures and even whole neighborhoods. In the mid-twentieth century, at the height of the urban renewal movement, many working-class neighborhoods across America were destroyed, in many cases benefiting real estate developers and business interests who moved in and redeveloped the areas.
urbanization : The growth of cities.
validity : The extent to which the measurement a researcher uses accurately measures what it is intended to measure.
value : A judgment about what is intrinsically important or meaningful. When it comes to research, values held by sociologists shape their views of and perspectives on the questions they ask.
visa : A legal status specifying the terms and length under which someone may live (or visit) another country. It may range from permission to enter for a few days to being allowed to live there permanently (in the United States, the latter type of visa is known as a “green card”).
war on drugs : The United States‘ effort to reduce the sale and consumption of illegal drugs by increasing police surveillance and punishment of drug offenders.
war on terror : The U.S. government’s effort to combat terrorism, especially in the period since the attacks of September 11, 2001.
Washington Consensus : The common prescriptions of Washington, D.C.–based organizations such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the U.S. Treasury Department for how developing countries should respond to economic problems or crises. These prescriptions typically suggest that developing countries should engage in free trade, reduce the role and expense of government, and more generally encourage the growth of free markets.
wealth : The wealth of an individual or family is the net value of all assets owned by an individual or family, including the value of their home.
weighting : In a survey where there are differences between some known property of the population being studied and the completed interviews (such as the percentage of women, or minorities, or some other key population characteristic), the results can be adjusted by giving slightly more importance to the responses of each member of an undersampled group.
welfare state : The bundle of programs that provide social insurance and social assistance for people falling into one or another category of attributes (such as old age, disability, or poverty). The most important types of welfare-state programs are old-age pensions (known in the United States as Social Security), health insurance programs, unemployment insurance, job training programs, and general welfare assistance for the very poor. Some analysts also include education in the mix of programs considered part of the welfare state.
well-being : The different dimensions of life that are essential to our everyday lives. Among the most important aspects of well-being are health, exposure to crime and violence, exposure to environmental risks like air or water pollution, and even one’s general level of happiness.
white flight : A term used to describe the large-scale migration of white families in the United States in the mid-twentieth century out of racially mixed cities and urban neighborhoods to racially homogeneous suburban areas.
white privilege : A concept that refers to the advantages of being white versus non-White. White Americans, on average, have higher earnings, greater freedom to choose where to live, more opportunities for upward mobility, and less likelihood of being arrested than other racial groups. They are also less burdened by negative stereotypes.
white-collar crime : Illegal activities undertaken by businesses or by individuals working for corporations.
working poor : People who do not make enough income to be free from poverty, even if they work full time.
achieved statuses : Positions that are earned, accomplished, or involve at least some effort or activity on the individual’s part.
acid rain : Rain containing sulfuric and nitric acids (burning fossil fuels release sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide that become sulfuric and nitric acids when they react with moisture in the air).
acting crowd : An excited group of people who move toward a goal.
activity theory : The view that satisfaction during old age is related to a person’s amount and quality of activity.
age cohort : People born at roughly the same time who pass through the life course together.
ageism : Prejudice and discrimination directed against people because of their age; can be directed against any age group, including youth.
agent provocateur : Someone who spies on a group or tries to sabotage it.
agents of socialization : People or groups that affect our self concept, attitudes, behaviors, or other orientations toward life.
aggregate : Individuals who temporarily share the same physical space but who do not see themselves as belonging together.
agricultural revolution : The second social revolution, based on the invention of the plow, which led to agricultural societies.
agricultural society : A society based on large-scale agriculture.
alienation : Marx’s term for workers’ lack of connection to the product of their labor; caused by workers being assigned repetitive tasks on a small part of a product, which leads to a sense of powerlessness and normlessness; others use the term in the general sense of not feeling a part of something.
alterative social movement : A social movement that seeks to alter only some specific aspects of people and institutions.
alternative medicine : Medical treatment other than that of standard Western medicine; often refers to practices that originate in Asia, but may also refer to taking vitamins not prescribed by a doctor.
anarchy : A condition of lawlessness or political disorder caused by the absence or collapse of governmental authority.
animism : The belief that all objects in the world have spirits, some of which are dangerous and must be outwitted.
anomie : Durkheim’s term for a condition of society in which people become detached from the usual norms that guide their behavior.
anti-Semitism : Prejudice, discrimination, and persecution directed against Jews.
anticipatory socialization : The process of learning in advance an anticipated future role or status.
apartheid : The government-approved-and-enforced separation of racial–ethnic groups as was practiced in South Africa.
applied sociology : The use of sociology to solve problems—from the micro level of classroom interaction and family relationships to the macro level of crime and pollution.
ascribed status : A position an individual either inherits at birth or receives involuntarily later in life.
assimilation : The process of being absorbed into the mainstream culture.
authoritarian leader : An individual who leads by giving orders.
authoritarian personality : Theodor Adorno’s term for people who are prejudiced and rank high on scales of conformity, intolerance, insecurity, respect for authority, and submissiveness to superiors.
authority : Power that people consider legitimate, as rightly exercised over them; also called legitimate power.
back stages : Places where people rest from their performances, discuss their presentations, and plan future performances.
background assumption : A deeply embedded, common understanding of how the world operates and of how people ought to act.
barter : The direct exchange of one item for another.
basic (or pure) sociology : Sociological research for the purpose of making discoveries about life in human groups, not for making changes in those groups.
basic demographic equation : The growth rate equals births minus deaths plus net migration.
bilineal system (of descent) : A system of reckoning descent that counts both the mother’s and the father’s side.
biotech society : A society whose economy increasingly centers on modifying genetics to produce food, medicine, and materials.
blended family : A family whose members were once part of other families.
body language : The ways in which people use their bodies to give messages to others.
bonded labor (indentured service) : A contractual system in which someone sells his or her body (services) for a specified period of time in an arrangement very close to slavery, except that it is entered into voluntarily.
born again : A term describing Christians who have undergone a religious experience so life transforming that they feel they have become new persons.
bourgeoisie : Marx’s term for capitalists, those who own the means of production.
bureaucracy : A formal organization with a hierarchy of authority and a clear division of labor; emphasis on impersonality of positions and written rules, communications, and records.
capital punishment : The death penalty.
capitalism : An economic system built around the private ownership of the means of production, the pursuit of profit, and market competition.
cargo cult : A social movement in which South Pacific islanders destroyed their possessions in anticipation that their ancestors would ship them new goods.
case study : An intensive analysis of a single event, situation, or individual.
caste system : A form of social stratification in which people’s statuses are lifelong conditions determined by birth.
category : People, objects, and events that have similar characteristics and are classified together.
centrist party : A political party that represents the center of political opinion.
charisma : Literally, an extraordinary gift from God; more commonly, an outstanding, “magnetic” personality.
charismatic authority : Authority based on an individual’s outstanding traits, which attract followers.
charismatic leader : Literally, someone to whom God has given a gift; in its extended sense, someone who exudes extraordinary appeal to a group of followers.
checks and balances : The separation of powers among the three branches of U.S. government—legislative, executive, and judicial—so that each is able to nullify the actions of the other two, thus preventing any single branch from dominating the government.
church : According to Durkheim, one of the three essential elements of religion—a moral community of believers; also refers to a large, highly organized religious group that has formal, sedate worship services with little emphasis on evangelism, intense religious experience, or personal conversion.
circular reaction : Robert Park’s term for back-and-forth communications among the members of a crowd whereby a “collective impulse” is transmitted.
citizenship : The concept that birth (and residence or naturalization) in a country imparts basic rights.
city : A place in which a large number of people are permanently based and do not produce their own food.
city-state : An independent city whose power radiates outward, bringing the adjacent area under its rule.
civil religion : Robert Bellah’s term for religion that is such an established feature of a country’s life that its history and social institutions become sanctified by being associated with God.
class conflict : Marx’s term for the struggle between capitalists and workers.
class consciousness : Marx’s term for awareness of a common identity based on one’s position in the means of production.
class system : A form of social stratification based primarily on income, education, and prestige of occupation.
clique (cleek) : A cluster of people within a larger group who choose to interact with one another.
closed-ended questions : Questions that are followed by a list of possible answers to be selected by the respondent.
coalition : The alignment of some members of a group against others.
coalition government : A government in which a country’s largest party does not have enough votes to rule, and to do so aligns itself with one or more smaller parties.
coercion : Power that people do not accept as rightly exercised over them; also called illegitimate power.
cohabitation : Unmarried couples living together in a sexual relationship.
collective behavior : Extraordinary activities carried out by groups of people; includes lynchings, rumors, panics, urban legends, fads, and fashions.
collective mind : Gustave LeBon’s term for the tendency of people in a crowd to feel, think, and act in extraordinary ways.
colonialism : The process by which one nation takes over another nation, usually for the purpose of exploiting its labor and natural resources.
common sense : Those things that “everyone knows” are true.
compartmentalize : To separate acts from feelings or attitudes.
conflict theory : A theoretical framework in which society is viewed as composed of groups that are competing for scarce resources.
conspicuous consumption : Thorstein Veblen’s term for a change from the thrift, saving, and investing of the Protestant ethic to showing off wealth through spending and the display of possessions.
contact theory : The idea that prejudice and negative stereotypes decrease and racial–ethnic relations improve when people from different racial–ethnic backgrounds, who are of equal status, interact frequently.
continuity theory : A theory focusing on how people adjust to retirement by continuing aspects of their earlier lives.
contradictory class locations : Erik Wright’s term for a position in the class structure that generates contradictory interests.
control group : The subjects in an experiment who are not exposed to the independent variable.
control theory : The idea that two control systems—inner controls and outer controls—work against our tendencies to deviate.
convergence theory : The view that as capitalist and socialist economic systems each adopt features of the other, a hybrid (or mixed) economic system will emerge.
core values : The values that are central to a group, those around which people build a common identity.
corporate capitalism : The domination of an economic system by giant corporations.
corporate crime : Crimes committed by executives in order to benefit their corporation.
corporate culture : The values, norms, and other orientations that characterize corporate work settings.
corporation : A business enterprise whose assets, liabilities, and obligations are separate from those of its owners; as a legal entity, it can enter into contracts, assume debt, and sue and be sued.
correspondence principle : The sociological principle that schools correspond to (or reflect) the social structure of their society.
cosmology : Teachings or ideas that provide a unified picture of the world.
counterculture : A group whose values, beliefs, norms, and related behaviors place its members in opposition to the broader culture.
creative aging : The view that old age is a time for personal development, for greater creativity and learning new skills and outlooks on life.
credential society : The use of diplomas and degrees to determine who is eligible for jobs, even though the diploma or degree may be irrelevant to the actual work.
credit card : A device that allows its owner to purchase goods and to be billed later.
crime : The violation of norms written into law.
criminal justice system : The system of police, courts, and prisons set up to deal with people who are accused of having committed a crime.
crude birth rate : The annual number of live births per 1,000 population.
crude death rate : The annual number of deaths per 1,000 population.
cult : A new religion with few followers, whose teachings and practices put it at odds with the dominant culture and religion.
cultural capital : Privileges accompanying a social location that help someone in life; included are more highly educated parents, from grade school through high school being pushed to bring home high grades, and enjoying cultural experiences that translate into higher test scores, better jobs, and higher earnings.
cultural diffusion : The spread of cultural traits from one group to another; includes both material and nonmaterial cultural traits.
cultural goals : The objectives held out as legitimate or desirable for the members of a society to achieve.
cultural lag : Ogburn’s term for human behavior lagging behind technological innovations.
cultural leveling : The process by which cultures become similar to one another; refers especially to the process by which Western culture is being exported and diffused into other nations.
cultural relativism : Not judging a culture but trying to understand it on its own terms.
cultural transmission of values : The process of transmitting values from one group to another; often refers to how cultural traits are transmitted across generations; in education, the ways in which schools transmit a society’s culture, especially its core values.
cultural universal : A value, norm, or other cultural trait that is found in every group.
culture : The language, beliefs, values, norms, behaviors, and even material objects that characterize a group and are passed from one generation to the next.
culture of poverty : The assumption that the values and behaviors of the poor make them fundamentally different from other people, that these factors are largely responsible for their poverty, and that parents perpetuate poverty across generations by passing these characteristics to their children.
culture shock : The disorientation that people experience when they come in contact with a fundamentally different culture and can no longer depend on their taken-for-granted assumptions about life.
currency : Paper money.
debit card : A device that electronically withdraws the cost of an item from the cardholder’s bank account.
defensive medicine : Medical practices done not for the patient’s benefit but in order to protect physicians from malpractice suits.
deferred gratification : Going without something in the present in the hope of achieving greater gains in the future.
degradation ceremony : A term coined by Harold Garfinkel to refer to a ritual whose goal is to remake someone’s self by stripping away that individual’s self-identity and stamping a new identity in its place.
dehumanization : The act or process of reducing people to objects that do not deserve the treatment accorded humans.
deindustrialization : The process of industries moving out of a country or region.
democracy : A government whose authority comes from the people; the term, based on two Greek words, translates literally as “power to the people”.
democratic leader : An individual who leads by trying to reach a consensus.
democratic socialism : A hybrid economic system in which the individual ownership of businesses is mixed with the state ownership of industries thought essential to the public welfare, such as the postal service, natural resources, the medical delivery system, and mass transportation.
demographic transition : A three-stage historical process of change in the size of populations: first, high birth rates and high death rates; second, high birth rates and low death rates; and third, low birth rates and low death rates; a fourth stage of population shrinkage in which deaths outnumber births has made its appearance in the Most Industrialized Nations.
demographic variables : The three factors that change the size of a population: fertility, mortality, and net migration.
demography : The study of the size, composition, growth (or shrinkage), and distribution of human populations.
denomination : A “brand name” within a major religion; for example, Methodist or Baptist.
dependency ratio : The number of workers who are required to support each dependent person—those 65 and older and those 15 and under.
dependent variable : A factor in an experiment that is changed by an independent variable.
depersonalization : Dealing with people as though they were objects; in the case of medical care, as though patients were merely cases and diseases, not people.
deposit receipt : A receipt stating that a certain amount of goods are on deposit in a warehouse or bank; the receipt is used as a form of money.
deviance : The violation of norms (or rules or expectations).
dialectical process (of history) : Each arrangement of power (a thesis) contains contradictions (antitheses) which make the arrangement unstable and which must be resolved; the new arrangement of power (a synthesis) contains its own contradictions; this process of balancing and unbalancing continues throughout history as groups struggle for power and other resources.
dictatorship : A form of government in which an individual has seized power.
differential association : Edwin Sutherland’s term to indicate that people who associate with some groups learn an “excess of definitions” of deviance, increasing the likelihood that they will become deviant.
diffusion : The spread of an invention or a discovery from one area to another; identified by William Ogburn as one of three processes of social change.
direct democracy : A form of democracy in which the eligible voters meet together to discuss issues and make their decisions.
disabling environment : An environment that is harmful to health.
discovery : A new way of seeing reality; identified by William Ogburn as one of three processes of social change.
discrimination : An act of unfair treatment directed against an individual or a group.
disengagement theory : The view that society is stabilized by having the elderly retire (disengage from) their positions of responsibility so the younger generation can step into their shoes.
disinvestment : The withdrawal of investments by financial institutions, which seals the fate of an urban area.
divine right of kings : The idea that the king’s authority comes from God; in an interesting gender bender, also applies to queens.
division of labor : The splitting of a group’s or a society’s tasks into specialties.
documents : In its narrow sense, written sources that provide data; in its extended sense, archival material of any sort, including photographs, movies, CDs, DVDs, and so on.
domestication revolution : The first social revolution, based on the domestication of plants and animals, which led to pastoral and horticultural societies.
dominant group : The group with the most power, greatest privileges, and highest social status.
downward social mobility : Movement down the social class ladder.
dramaturgy : An approach, pioneered by Erving Goffman, in which social life is analyzed in terms of drama or the stage; also called dramaturgical analysis.
dumping : Private hospitals sending unprofitable patients to public hospitals or any hospital discharging unprofitable patients before they are well.
dyad : The smallest possible group, consisting of two persons.
e-cash : Digital money that is stored on computers.
ecclesia : A religious group so integrated into the dominant culture that it is difficult to tell where the one begins and the other leaves off; also called a state religion.
eco-sabotage : Actions taken to sabotage the efforts of people who are thought to be legally harming the environment.
economy : A system of producing and distributing goods and services.
edge city : A large clustering of service facilities and residential areas near highway intersections that provides a sense of place to people who live, shop, and work there.
education : A formal system of teaching knowledge, values, and skills.
egalitarian : Authority more or less equally divided between people or groups (in heterosexual marriage, for example, between husband and wife).
ego : Freud’s term for a balancing force between the id and the demands of society.
emergent norms : Ralph Turner and Lewis Killian’s term for the idea that people develop new norms to cope with a new situation; used to explain crowd behavior.
endogamy : The practice of marrying within one’s own group.
enterprise zone : The use of economic incentives in a designated area to encourage investment.
environmental injustice : Refers to how minorities and the poor are harmed the most by environmental pollution.
environmental sociology : A specialty within sociology whose focus is how humans affect the environment and how the environment affects humans.
epidemiology : The study of patterns of disease and disability in a population.
estate stratification system : The stratification system of medieval Europe, consisting of three groups or estates: the nobility, clergy, and commoners.
ethnic cleansing : A policy of eliminating a population; includes forcible expulsion and genocide.
ethnic work : Activities designed to discover, enhance, maintain, or transmit an ethnic or racial identity.
ethnicity (and ethnic) : Having distinctive cultural characteristics.
ethnocentrism : The use of one’s own culture as a yardstick for judging the ways of other individuals or societies, generally leading to a negative evaluation of their values, norms, and behaviors.
ethnomethodology : The study of how people use background assumptions to make sense out of life.
euthanasia : Mercy killing.
evangelism : An attempt to win converts.
exchange mobility : A large number of people moving up the social class ladder, while a large number move down; it is as though they have exchanged places, and the social class system shows little change.
exogamy : The practice of marrying outside of one’s group.
experiment : The use of control and experimental groups and dependent and independent variables to test causation.
experimental group : The group of subjects in an experiment who are exposed to the independent variable.
exponential growth curve : A pattern of growth in which numbers double during approximately equal intervals, showing a steep acceleration in the later stages.
expressive leader : An individual who increases harmony and minimizes conflict in a group; also known as a socioemotional leader.
extended family : A family in which relatives, such as the “older generation” or unmarried aunts and uncles, live with the parents and their children.
face-saving behavior : Techniques used to salvage a performance (interaction) that is going sour.
fad : A temporary pattern of behavior that catches people’s attention.
false class consciousness : Marx’s term to refer to workers identifying with the interests of capitalists.
family : Two or more people who consider themselves related by blood, marriage, or adoption.
family of orientation : The family in which a person grows up.
family of procreation : The family formed when a couple’s first child is born.
fashion : A pattern of behavior that catches people’s attention and lasts longer than a fad.
fecundity : The number of children that women are capable of bearing.
fee-for-service : Payment to a physician to diagnose and treat a patient’s medical problems.
feminism : The philosophy that men and women should be politically, economically, and socially equal; organized activities on behalf of this principle.
feminization of poverty : A condition of U.S. poverty in which most poor families are headed by women.
feral children : Children assumed to have been raised by animals, in the wilderness, isolated from humans.
fertility rate : The number of children that the average woman bears.
fiat money : Currency issued by a government that is not backed by stored value.
folkways : Norms that are not strictly enforced.
formal organization : A secondary group designed to achieve explicit objectives.
front stages : Places where people give performances.
functional analysis : A theoretical framework in which society is viewed as composed of various parts, each with a function that, when fulfilled, contributes to society’s equilibrium; also known as functionalism and structural functionalism.
functional equivalent : A substitute that serves the same functions (or meets the same needs) as religion, for example, psychotherapy.
functional illiteracy : Refers to high school graduates who have difficulty with basic reading and math.
gatekeeping : The process by which education opens and closes doors of opportunity; another term for the social placement function of education.
Gemeinschaft : A type of society in which life is intimate; a community in which everyone knows everyone else and people share a sense of togetherness.
gender : The behaviors and attitudes that a society considers proper for its males and females; masculinity or femininity.
gender age : The relative value placed on men’s and women’s ages.
gender socialization : Learning society’s “gender map,” the paths in life set out for us because we are male or female.
gender stratification : Males’ and females’ unequal access to property, power, and prestige.
generalizability : The extent to which the findings from one group (or sample) can be generalized or applied to other groups (or populations).
generalization : A statement that goes beyond the individual case and is applied to a broader group or situation.
generalized other : The norms, values, attitudes, and expectations of people “in general”; the child’s ability to take the role of the generalized other is a significant step in the development of a self.
genetic predisposition : Inborn tendencies (for example, a tendency to commit devianacts).
genocide : The annihilation or attempted annihilation of a people because of their presumed race or ethnicity.
gentrification : Middle-class people moving into a rundown area of a city, displacing the poor as they buy and restore homes.
Gesellschaft : A type of society that is dominated by impersonal relationships, individual accomplishments, and self-interest.
gestures : The ways in which people use their bodies to communicate with one another.
glass ceiling : The mostly invisible barrier that keeps women from advancing to the top levels at work.
global superclass : The top members of the capitalist class, who, through their worldwide interconnections, make the major decisions that affect the world.
globalization : The growing interconnections among nations due to the expansion of capitalism.
globalization of capitalism : Capitalism (investing to make profits within a rational system) becoming the globe’s dominant economic system.
goal displacement : An organization replacing old goals with new ones; also known as goal replacement.
gold standard : Paper money backed by gold.
grade inflation : Higher grades given for the same work; a general rise in student grades without a corresponding increase in learning.
graying of America : The growing percentage of older people in the U.S. population.
gross domestic product (GDP) : The amount of goods and services produced by a nation.
group : People who interact with one another and who believe that what they have in common is significant; also called a social group.
group dynamics : The ways in which individuals affect groups and the ways in which groups influence individuals.
groupthink : A narrowing of thought by a group of people, leading to the perception that there is only one correct answer and that to even suggest alternatives is a sign of disloyalty.
growth rate : The net change in a population after adding births, subtracting deaths, and either adding or subtracting net migration; can result in a negative number.
health : A human condition measured by four components: physical, mental, social, and spiritual.
hidden corporate culture : Stereotypes of the traits that make for high-performing and underperforming workers, which end up producing both types of workers.
hidden curriculum : The unwritten goals of schools, such as teaching obedience to authority and conformity to cultural norms.
homogamy : The tendency of people with similar characteristics to marry one another.
Horatio Alger myth : The belief that due to limitless possibilities anyone can get ahead if he or she tries hard enough.
horticultural society : A society based on cultivating plants by the use of hand tools.
hospice : Professional care given to dying people at home. Originally referred to a place, a hospice, but now refers to home care.
household : People who occupy the same housing unit.
human ecology : Robert Park’s term for the relationship between people and their environment (such as land and structures); also known as urban ecology.
humanizing the work setting : Organizing a workplace in such a way that it develops rather than impedes human potential.
hunting and gathering society : A human group that depends on hunting and gathering for its survival.
hypothesis : A statement of how variables are expected to be related to one another, often according to predictions from a theory.
id : Freud’s term for our inborn basic drives.
ideal culture : A people’s ideal values and norms; the goals held out for them.
ideology : Beliefs about the way things ought to be that justify social arrangements.
illegitimate opportunity structure : Opportunities for crimes that are woven into the texture of life.
impression management : People’s efforts to control the impressions that others receive of them.
in-group : A group toward which one feels loyalty.
incest : Sexual relations between specified relatives, such as brothers and sisters or parents and children.
incest taboo : The rule that prohibits sex and marriage among designated relatives.
inclusion : Helping people to become part of the mainstream of society; also called mainstreaming.
income : Money received, usually from a job, business, or assets.
independent variable : A factor that causes a change in another variable, called the dependent variable.
individual discrimination : Person-to-person or face-to-face discrimination; the negative treatment of people by other individuals.
Industrial Revolution : The third social revolution, occurring when machines powered by fuels replaced most animal and human power.
industrial society : A society based on the harnessing of machines powered by fuels.
inflation : An increase in prices; technically, an increase in the amount of money in circulation, which leads to an increase in prices.
institutional discrimination : Negative treatment of a minority group that is built into a society’s institutions; also called systemic discrimination.
institutionalized means : Approved ways of reaching cultural goals.
instrumental leader : An individual who tries to keep the group moving toward its goals; also known as a task-oriented leader.
intergenerational mobility : The change that family members make in social class from one generation to the next.
interlocking directorates : The same people serving on the boards of directors of several companies.
internal colonialism : The policy of exploiting minority groups for economic gain.
interview : Direct questioning of respondents.
interviewer bias : Effects of interviewers on respondents that lead to biased answers.
invasion–succession cycle : The process of one group of people displacing a group whose racial–ethnic or social class characteristics differ from their own.
invention : The combination of existing elements and materials to form new ones; identified by William Ogburn as one of three processes of social change.
iron law of oligarchy : Robert Michels’ term for the tendency of formal organizations to be dominated by a small, self perpetuating elite.
labeling theory : The view that the labels people are given affect their own and others’ perceptions of them, thus channeling their behavior into either deviance or conformity.
laissez-faire capitalism : Literally “hands off” capitalism, meaning that the government doesn’t interfere in the market.
laissez-faire leader : An individual who leads by being highly permissive.
language : A system of symbols that can be combined in an infinite number of ways and can represent not only objects but also abstract thought.
latent functions : Unintended beneficial consequences of people’s actions.
leader : Someone who influences other people.
leadership styles : Ways in which people express their leadership.
life course : The stages of our life as we go from birth to death.
life expectancy : The number of years that an average person at any age, including newborns, can expect to live.
life span : The maximum length of life of a species; for humans, the longest that a human has lived.
lobbyists : People who influence legislation on behalf of their clients.
looking-glass self : A term coined by Charles Horton Cooley to refer to the process by which our self develops through internalizing others’ reactions to us.
machismo : An emphasis on male strength and dominance.
macro-level analysis : An examination of large-scale patterns of society; such as how Wall Street and the political establishment are interrelated.
macropolitics : The exercise of large-scale power, the government being the most common example.
macrosociology : Analysis of social life that focuses on broad features of society, such as social class and the relationships of groups to one another; usually used by functionalists and conflict theorists.
Malthus theorem : An observation by Thomas Malthus that although the food supply increases arithmetically (from 1 to 2 to 3 to 4 and so on), population grows geometrically (from 2 to 4 to 8 to 16 and so forth).
mandatory education laws : Laws that require all children to attend school until a specified age or until they complete a minimum grade in school.
manifest functions : The intended beneficial consequences of people’s actions.
market forces : The law of supply and demand.
marriage : A group’s approved mating arrangements, usually marked by a ritual of some sort.
mass hysteria : An imagined threat that causes physical symptoms among a large number of people.
mass media : Forms of communication, such as radio, newspapers, and television that are directed to mass audiences.
master status : A status that cuts across the other statuses that an individual occupies.
material culture : The material objects that distinguish a group of people, such as their art, buildings, weapons, utensils, machines, hairstyles, clothing, and jewelry.
matriarchy : A society in which women-as-a-group dominate men-as-a-group; authority is vested in females.
matrilineal system (of descent) : A system of reckoning descent that counts only the mother’s side.
McDonaldization of society : The process by which ordinary aspects of life are rationalized and efficiency comes to rule them, including such things as food preparation.
means of production : The tools, factories, land, and investment capital used to produce wealth.
mechanical solidarity : Durkheim’s term for the unity (a shared consciousness) that people feel as a result of performing the same or similar tasks.
medicalization : The transformation of a human condition into a medical matter to be treated by physicians.
medicalization of deviance : To make deviance a medical matter, a symptom of some underlying illness that needs to be treated by physicians.
medicine : One of the social institutions that sociologists study; a society’s organized ways of dealing with sickness and injury.
medium of exchange : The means by which people place a value on goods and services in order to make an exchange—for example, currency, gold, and silver.
megacity : A city of 10 million or more residents.
megalopolis : An urban area consisting of at least two metropolises and their many suburbs.
meritocracy : A form of social stratification in which all positions are awarded on the basis of merit.
metaformative social movement : A social movement that has the goal to change the social order not just of a country or two, but of a civilization, or even of the entire world.
metropolis : A central city surrounded by smaller cities and their suburbs.
metropolitan statistical area (MSA) : A central city and the urbanized counties adjacent to it.
micro-level analysis : An examination of small-scale patterns of society; such as how the members of a group interact.
micropolitics : The exercise of power in everyday life, such as deciding who is going to do the housework or use the remote control.
microsociology : Analysis of social life that focuses on social interaction; typically used by symbolic interactionists.
militarization of social institutions (the) : the use of social institutions to fulfil military goals
millenarian social movement : A social movement based on the prophecy of coming social upheaval.
milling : A crowd standing or walking around as they talk excitedly about some event.
minimax strategy : Richard Berk’s term for the efforts people make to minimize their costs and maximize their rewards.
minority group : People who are singled out for unequal treatment and who regard themselves as objects of collective discrimination.
modernization : The transformation of traditional societies into industrial societies.
monarchy : A form of government headed by a king or queen.
money : Any item (from sea shells to gold) that serves as a medium of exchange.
monopoly : The control of an entire industry by a single company.
monotheism : The belief that there is only one God.
moral panic : A fear gripping a large number of people that some evil threatens the wellbeing of society; followed by hostility, sometimes violence, toward those thought responsible.
mores : Norms that are strictly enforced because they are thought essential to core values or the well-being of the group.
multiculturalism (or pluralism) : A policy that permits or encourages ethnic differences.
multinational corporations : Companies that operate across national boundaries; also called transnational corporations.
nationalism : Strongly identifying with a nation (a people) accompanied by desiring that nation to be dominant.
natural sciences : The intellectual and academic disciplines designed to comprehend, explain, and predict events in our natural environments.
negative sanction : An expression of disapproval for breaking a norm, ranging from a mild, informal reaction such as a frown to a formal reaction such as a prize or a prison sentence.
neocolonialism : The economic and political dominance of the Most Industrialized Nations over the Least Industrialized Nations.
net migration rate : The difference between the number of immigrants and emigrants per 1,000 population.
new technology : The emerging technologies of an era that have a significant impact on social life.
noncentrist party : A political party that represents less popular ideas.
nonmaterial culture : A group’s ways of thinking (including its beliefs, values, and other assumptions about the world) and doing (its common patterns of behavior, including language and other forms of interaction); also called symbolic culture.
nonverbal interaction : Communication without words through gestures, use of space, silence, and so on.
norms : Expectations of “right” behavior.
nuclear family : A family consisting of a husband, wife, and child(ren).
objectivity : Value neutrality in research.
oligarchy : A form of government in which a small group of individuals holds power; the rule of the many by the few.
open-ended questions : Questions that respondents answer in their own words.
operational definition : The way in which a researcher measures a variable.
organic solidarity : Durkheim’s term for the interdependence that results from the division of labor; as part of the same unit, we all depend on others to fulfill their jobs.
out-group : A group toward which one feels antagonism.
pan-Indianism : An attempt to develop an identity that goes beyond the tribe by emphasizing the common elements that run through Native American cultures.
panic : The condition of being so fearful that one cannot function normally and may even flee.
participant observation (or fieldwork) : Research in which the researcher participates in a research setting while observing what is happening in that setting.
pastoral society : A society based on the pasturing of animals.
patriarchy : Men-as-a-group dominating women-as-a-group; authority is vested in males.
patrilineal system (of descent) : A system of reckoning descent that counts only the father’s side.
patterns of behavior : Recurring behaviors or events.
peer group : A group of individuals, often of roughly the same age, who are linked by common interests and orientations.
personality disorders : The view that a personality disturbance of some sort causes an individual to violate social norms.
Peter Principle : A tongue in-cheek observation that the members of an organization are promoted for their accomplishments until they reach their level of incompetence; there they cease to be promoted, remaining at the level at which they can no longer do good work.
pluralism : The diffusion of power among many interest groups that prevents any single group from gaining control of the government.
pluralistic society : A society made up of many different groups.
police discretion : The practice of the police, in the normal course of their duties, to either arrest or ticket someone for an offense or to overlook the matter.
political action committee (PAC) : An organization formed by one or more special-interest groups to solicit and spend funds for the purpose of influencing legislation.
politics : The exercise of power and attempts to maintain or to change power relations.
polyandry : A form of marriage in which women have more than one husband.
polygyny : A form of marriage in which men have more than one wife.
polytheism : The belief that there are many gods.
population : A target group to be studied.
population pyramid : A graph that represents the age and sex of a population (see Figure 20.7).
population shrinkage : The process by which a country’s population becomes smaller because its birth rate and immigration are too low to replace those who die and emigrate.
population transfer : The forced transfer of a minority group.
positive sanction : A reward or positive reaction for following norms, ranging from a smile to a material reward.
positivism : The application of the scientific approach to the social world.
postindustrial (information) society : A society based on information, services, and high technology, rather than on raw materials and manufacturing.
postmodern society : Another term for postindustrial society.
poverty line : The official measure of poverty; calculated to include incomes that are less than three times a low-cost food budget.
power : The ability to carry out one’s will, even over the resistance of others.
power elite : C. Wright Mills’ term for the top people in U.S. corporations, military, and politics who make the nation’s major decisions.
prejudice : An attitude or prejudging, usually in a negative way.
prestige : Respect or regard.
primary group : A small group characterized by intimate, longterm, face-to-face association and cooperation.
proactive social movement : A social movement that promotes some social change.
profane : Durkheim’s term for common elements of everyday life.
professionalization of medicine : The development of medicine into a specialty that requires physicians to (1) obtain a rigorous education, (2) regulate themselves, (3) take authority over clients, (4) claim a theoretical understanding of illness, and (5) present themselves as doing a service to society (rather than just following self-interest).
proletariat : Marx’s term for the exploited class, the mass of workers who do not own the means of production.
propaganda : In its broad sense, the presentation of information in an attempt to influence people; in its narrow sense, one-sided information used to try to influence people.
property : Material possessions: animals, bank accounts, bonds, buildings, businesses, cars, cash, commodities, copyrights, furniture, jewelry, land, and stocks.
proportional representation : An electoral system in which seats in a legislature are divided according to the proportion of votes that each political party receives.
Protestant ethic : Weber’s term to describe the ideal of a self–denying, highly moral life accompanied by thrift and hard work.
public : In this context, a dispersed group of people relevant to a social movement; the sympathetic and hostile publics have an interest in the issues on which a social movement focuses; there is also an unaware or indifferent public.
public opinion : How people think about some issue.
public sociology : Applying sociology for the public good; especially the use of the sociological perspective (how things are related to one another) to guide politicians and policy makers.
questionnaires : A list of questions to be asked of respondents.
quiet revolution : The fundamental changes in society that follow when vast numbers of women enter the workforce.
race : A group whose inherited physical characteristics distinguish it from other groups.
racism : Prejudice and discrimination on the basis of race.
random sample : A sample in which everyone in the target population has the same chance of being included in the study.
rapport (ruh-POUR) : A feeling of trust between researchers and the people they are studying.
rationality : Using rules, efficiency, and practical results to determine human affairs.
rationalization of society : A widespread acceptance of rationality and social organizations that are built largely around this idea.
rational–legal authority : Authority based on law or written rules and regulations; also called bureaucratic authority.
reactive social movement : A social movement that resists some social change.
real culture : The norms and values that people actually follow; as opposed to ideal culture.
recidivism rate : The percentage of released convicts who are rearrested.
redemptive social movement : A social movement that seeks to change people and institutions totally, to redeem them.
redlining : A decision by the officers of a financial institution not to make loans in a particular area.
reference group : A group whose standards we refer to as we evaluate ourselves.
reformative social movement : A social movement that seeks to reform some specific aspect of society.
reincarnation : In Hinduism and Buddhism, the return of the soul (or self) after death in a different form.
relative deprivation theory : In this context, the belief that people join social movements based on their evaluations of what they think they should have compared with what others have.
reliability : The extent to which research produces consistent or dependable results.
religion : According to Durkheim, beliefs and practices that separate the profane from the sacred and unite its adherents into a moral community.
religious experience : A sudden awareness of the supernatural or a feeling of coming in contact with God.
replication : The repetition of a study in order to test its findings.
representative democracy : A form of democracy in which voters elect representatives to meet together to discuss issues and make decisions on their behalf.
research method (or research design) : One of seven procedures that sociologists use to collect data: surveys, participant observation, case studies, secondary analysis, documents, experiments, and unobtrusive measures.
reserve labor force : The unemployed; unemployed workers are thought of as being “in reserve”—capitalists take them “out of reserve” (put them back to work) during times of high production and then put them “back in reserve” (lay them off) when they are no longer needed.
resocialization : The process of learning new norms, values, attitudes, and behaviors.
resource mobilization : A theory that social movements succeed or fail based on their ability to mobilize resources such as time, money, and people’s skills.
respondents : People who respond to a survey, either in interviews or by self-administered questionnaires.
revolution : Armed resistance designed to overthrow and replace a government.
riot : Violent crowd behavior directed at people and property.
rising expectations : The sense that better conditions are soon to follow, which, if unfulfilled, increases frustration.
rituals : Ceremonies or repetitive practices; in religion, observances or rites often intended to evoke a sense of awe of the sacred.
role : The behaviors, obligations, and privileges attached to a status.
role conflict : Conflicts that someone feels between roles because the expectations are at odds with one another.
role extension : A role being stretched to include activities that were not originally part of that role.
role performance : The ways in which someone performs a role; showing a particular “style” or “personality”.
role strain : Conflicts that someone feels within a role.
romantic love : Feelings of erotic attraction accompanied by an idealization of the other.
routinization of charisma : The transfer of authority from a charismatic figure to either a traditional or a rational–legal form of authority.
ruling class : Another term for the power elite.
rumor : Unfounded information spread among people.
sacred : Durkheim’s term for things set apart or forbidden that inspire fear, awe, reverence, or deep respect.
sample : The individuals intended to represent the population to be studied.
sanctions : Either expressions of approval given to people for upholding norms or expressions of disapproval for violating them.
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis : Edward Sapir and Benjamin Whorf’s hypothesis that language creates ways of thinking and perceiving.
scapegoat : An individual or group unfairly blamed for someone else’s troubles.
science : The application of systematic methods to obtain knowledge and the knowledge obtained by those methods.
scientific method : The use of objective, systematic observations to test theories.
secondary analysis : The analysis of data that have been collected by other researchers.
secondary group : Compared with a primary group, a larger, relatively temporary, more anonymous, formal, and impersonal group based on some interest or activity.
sect : A religious group larger than a cult that still feels substantial hostility from and toward society.
secular : Belonging to the world and its affairs.
secularization of culture : The process by which a culture becomes less influenced by religion.
secularization of religion : The replacement of a religion’s spiritual or “other worldly” concerns with concerns about “this world”.
segregation : The policy of keeping racial–ethnic groups apart.
selective perception : Seeing certain features of an object or situation, but remaining blind to others.
self : The unique human capacity of being able to see ourselves “from the outside”; the views we internalize of how others see us.
self-administered questionnaires : Questionnaires that respondents fill out.
self-fulfilling prophecy : Robert Merton’s term for an originally false assertion that becomes true simply because it was predicted.
self-fulfilling stereotype : Preconceived ideas of what someone is like that lead to the person’s behaving in ways that match the stereotype.
serial murder : The killing of several victims in three or more separate events.
sex : Biological characteristics that distinguish females and males, consisting of primary and secondary sex characteristics.
sexual harassment : The abuse of one’s position of authority to force unwanted sexual demands on someone.
shaman : The healing specialist of a tribe who attempts to control the spirits thought to cause a disease or injury; often called a witch doctor.
sign-vehicle : The term used by Goffman to refer to how people use social setting, appearance, and manner to communicate information about the self.
significant other : An individual who significantly influences someone else.
slavery : A form of social stratification in which some people own other people.
small group : A group small enough for everyone to interact directly with all the other members.
social change : The alteration of culture and societies over time.
social class : Large numbers of people who have similar amounts of income and education and who work at jobs that are roughly comparable in prestige.
social construction of reality : The use of background assumptions and life experiences to define what is real.
social control : A group’s formal and informal means of enforcing its norms.
social environment : The entire human environment, including interaction with others.
social facts : Durkheim’s term for a group’s patterns of behavior.
social inequality : A social condition in which privileges and obligations are given to some but denied to others.
social institution : The organized, usual, or standard ways by which society meets its basic needs.
social integration : The degree to which members of a group or a society feel united by shared values and other social bonds; also known as social cohesion.
social interaction : What people do when they are in one another’s presence; includes communications at a distance.
social location : The group memberships that people have because of their location in history and society.
social mobility : Movement up or down the social class ladder.
social movement : A large group of people who are organized to promote or resist some social change.
social movement organization : An organization to promote the goals of a social movement.
social network : The social ties radiating outward from the self that link people together.
social order : A group’s usual and customary social arrangements, on which its members depend and on which they base their lives.
social placement : A function of education—funneling people into a society’s various positions.
social promotion : Passing students on to the next level even though they have not mastered basic materials.
social sciences : The intellectual and academic disciplines designed to understand the social world objectively by means of controlled and repeated observations.
social stratification : The division of large numbers of people into layers according to their relative property, power, and prestige; applies to both nations and to people within a nation, society, or other group.
social structure : The framework of society that surrounds us; consists of the ways that people and groups are related to one another; this framework gives direction to and sets limits on our behavior.
socialism : An economic system built around the public ownership of the means of production, central planning, and the distribution of goods without a profit motive.
socialization : The process by which people learn the characteristics of their group—the knowledge, skills, attitudes, values, norms, and actions thought appropriate for them.
society : People who share a culture and a territory.
sociobiology : A framework of thought in which human behavior is considered to be the result of natural selection and biological factors.
sociological perspective : Understanding human behavior by placing it within its broader social context.
sociology : The scientific study of society and human behavior.
special-interest group : A group of people who support a particular issue and who can be mobilized for political action.
spirit of capitalism : Weber’s term for the desire to accumulate capital—not to spend it, but as an end in itself—and to constantly reinvest it.
split labor market : Workers split along racial–ethnic, gender, age, or any other lines; this split is exploited by owners to weaken the bargaining power of workers.
state : A political entity that claims monopoly on the use of violence in some particular territory; commonly known as a country.
state religion : A government–ponsored religion; also called ecclesia.
status : The position that someone occupies in a social group (also called social status).
status consistency : Ranking high or low on all three dimensions of social class.
status inconsistency : Ranking high on some dimensions of social class and low on others; also called status discrepancy.
status set : All the statuses or positions that an individual occupies.
status symbols : Indicators of a status, especially items in that display prestige.
stereotype : Assumptions of what people are like, whether true or false.
stigma : “blemishes” that discredit a person’s claim to a “normal” identity.
stockholders’ revolt : Refusal by stockholders at their annual meetings to approve management’s recommendations.
stored value : The goods that are stored and held in reserve that back up (or provide the value for) a deposit receipt or a currency.
strain theory : Robert Merton’s term for the strain engendered when a society socializes large numbers of people to desire a cultural goal (such as success), but withholds from some the approved means of reaching that goal; one adaptation to the strain is crime, the choice of an innovative means (one outside the approved system) to attain the cultural goal.
stratified random sample : A sample from selected subgroups of the target population in which everyone in those subgroups has an equal chance of .
street crime : Crimes such as mugging, rape, and burglary.
structural mobility : Movement up or down the social class ladder that is due more to changes in the structure of society than to the actions of individuals.
structured interviews : Interviews that use closed-ended questions.
subculture : The values and related behaviors of a group that distinguish its members from the larger culture; a world within a world.
subjective meanings : The meanings that people give their own behavior.
subsistence economy : A type of economy in which human groups live off the land and have little or no surplus.
suburb : A community adjacent to a city.
suburbanization : The migration of people from the city to the suburbs.
superego : Freud’s term for the conscience; the internalized norms and values of our social groups.
survey : The collection of data by having people answer a series of questions.
sustainable environment : A world system that takes into account the limits of the environment, produces enough material goods for everyone’s needs, and leaves a heritage of a sound environment for the next generation.
symbol : Something to which people attach meaning and then use to communicate with one another.
symbolic culture : Another term for nonmaterial culture.
symbolic interactionism : A theoretical perspective in which society is viewed as composed of symbols that people use to establish meaning, develop their views of the world, and communicate with one another.
system of descent : How kinship is traced over the generations.
taboo : A norm so strong that it brings extreme sanctions, even revulsion, if violated.
taking the role of the other : Putting yourself in someone else’s shoes; understanding how someone else feels and thinks, so you anticipate how that person will act.
teamwork : The collaboration of two or more people to manage impressions jointly.
techniques of neutralization : Ways of thinking or rationalizing that help people deflect (or neutralize) society’s norms.
technology : In its narrow sense, tools; its broader sense includes the skills or procedures necessary to make and use those tools.
terrorism : The use of violence or the threat of violence to produce fear in order to attain political objectives.
theory : A general statement about how some parts of the world fit together and how they work; an explanation of how two or more facts are related to one another.
Thomas theorem : William I. and Dorothy S. Thomas’ classic formulation of the definition of the situation: “If people define situations as real, they are real in their consequences”.
total institution : A place that is almost totally controlled by those who run it, in which people are cut off from the rest of society and the society is mostly cut off from them.
totalitarianism : A form of government that exerts almost total control over people.
tracking : The sorting of students into different programs on the basis of real or perceived abilities.
traditional authority : Authority based on custom.
traditional society : A society in which the past is thought to be the best guide for the present; tribal, peasant, and feudal societies.
transformative social movement : A social movement that seeks to change society totally, to transform it.
transitional adulthood : A term that refers to a period following high school when young adults have not yet taken on the responsibilities ordinarily associated with adulthood; also called adultolescence.
transitional older years : An emerging stage of the life course between retirement and when people are considered old; about age 63 to 74.
transnational social movements : Social movements whose emphasis is on some condition around the world, instead of on a condition in a specific country; also known as new social movements.
triad : A group of three people.
two-tier system of medical care : A system of medical care in which the wealthy receive superior medical care and the poor inferior medical care.
underclass : A group of people for whom poverty persists year after year and across generations.
underground economy : Exchanges of goods and services that escape taxes because they are not reported to the government.
universal citizenship : The idea that everyone has the same basic rights by virtue of being born in a country (or by immigrating and becoming a naturalized citizen).
unobtrusive measures : Ways of observing people so they do not know they are being studied .
unstructured interviews : Interviews that use open-ended questions.
upward social mobility : Movement up the social class ladder.
urban legend : A story with an ironic twist that sounds realistic but is false.
urban renewal : The rehabilitation of a rundown area, which usually results in the displacement of the poor who are living in that area.
urbanization : The process by which an increasing proportion of a population lives in cities and has a growing influence on the culture.
validity : The extent to which an operational definition measures what it is intended to measure.
value cluster : Values that together form a larger whole.
value contradiction : Values that contradict one another; to follow the one means to come into conflict with the other.
value free : The view that a sociologist’s personal values or beliefs should not influence social research.
values : The standards by which people define what is desirable or undesirable, superior or inferior, good or bad, beautiful or ugly.
variable : A factor thought to be significant for human behavior, which can vary (or change) from one case to another.
Verstehen : A German word used by Weber that is perhaps best understood as “to have insight into someone’s situation”
voluntary associations : Groups made up of people who voluntarily organize on the basis of some mutual interest; also known as voluntary memberships and voluntary organizations.
voter apathy : Indifference and inaction on the part of individuals or groups with respect to the political process.
war : Armed conflict between nations or politically distinct groups.
WASP : White Anglo-Saxon Protestant.
wealth : The total value of everything someone owns, minus the debts.
white ethnics : White immigrants to the United States whose cultures differ from WASP culture.
white-collar crime : Edwin Sutherland’s term for crimes committed by people of respectable and high social status in the course of their occupations; for example, bribery of public officials, securities violations, embezzlement, false advertising, and price fixing.
world system : The economic, political, and cultural connections that tie the world’s countries together
world system theory : A theory of how the economic and political connections developed that now tie the world’s countries together.
zero population growth : Women bearing only enough children to reproduce the population.